[12:3]
(We narrate unto thee (Muhammad) the best of narratives…)

[12:3]. ‘Abd al-Qahir ibn Tahir informed us>
Abu ‘Amr ibn Matar> Ja‘far ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Mustafad> Ishaq ibn Ibrahim al-Hanzali>
‘Amr ibn Muhammad al-Qurashi> Khallad ibn Muslim al-Saffar> ‘Amr ibn Qays al-Mula’i> ‘Amr ibn Murrah>
Mus‘ab ibn Sa‘d> his father Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas who said with regard to the words of Allah, exalted is He
(We narrate unto thee (Muhammad) the best of narratives…): “The Qur’an was revealed to the Messenger
of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and he recited it to them for quite a while. They said: ‘O
Messenger of Allah, if only you could narrate to us’, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Alif. Lam. Ra.
These are verses of the Scripture that maketh plain)

[12:1] up to His saying (We narrate unto thee
(Muhammad) the best of narratives…). He recited this to them for a while, then they said: ‘O Messenger of
Allah, if only you could relate to us statements’, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Allah hath (now)
revealed the fairest of statements, a Scripture consistent…)

[12:18]'. I 
118
turned away and lied down on my couch. By Allah, I knew I was innocent and I also knew that Allah will
clear me of this slander. However, by Allah, I did not think that a recited revelation would be sent down
regarding me. I thought myself to be too insignificant for Allah to speak about me something recited. I was
merely hoping that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, would see a dream vision in
which Allah, exalted is He, would clear me of the slander. By Allah, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, did not leave his position nor did anyone of the household go out until Allah, exalted is
He, sent down a revelation to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. He was seized by
the fever that usually seizes him upon receiving revelation, such that he sweated profusely even in rainy
days, as a result of the heaviness of the speech revealed to him. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, was smiling when he relaxed again. The first thing he said was: 'Good news for you, O
'A'ishah! By Allah, Allah has declared your innocence'. My mother said: 'Go to him', but I said: 'By Allah, I will
not, nor will I thank anyone but Allah, glorified and exalted is He, for it is Him Who has cleared me of the
slander'. Allah, glorious and exalted is He, revealed (Lo! they who spread the slander are a gang among
you) and the following ten verses. When Allah, exalted is He, revealed these verses regarding my innocence,
Abu Bakr al-Siddiq who used to spend on Mistah because of his ties of kinship and poverty said: 'By Allah, I
will not spend a thing on him after what he said about 'A'ishah'. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (And
let not those who possess dignity and ease among you swear not to give to the near of kin) up to His words
(Yearn ye not that Allah may forgive you? Allah is Forgiving, Merciful)

[12:3]. He recited these to them for a while until
they said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, if only you recite to us statements’. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed
(Allah hath (now) revealed the fairest of statements…)