[114:1-6]
(Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of mankind…)

[114:1-6]. The commentators of the Qur'an said: “The
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, had a Jewish servant boy. The Jews approached
him and kept after him until he gave them some fallen hair from the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace, as well as a few teeth from his comb. The Jews used these to cast a spell of black magic on him. The
person who was behind this was the Jew Labid ibn al-A'sam. He then put the hair in a well belonging to
Banu Zurayq called Dharwan. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, fell ill for a period
of six month, during which the hair of his head fell off; he imagined that he slept with his wives when he did
not, and was withering away without knowing the reason. As he was one day sleeping, he saw two angels
coming to him. One of them sat at his head and the other at his feet. The angel who sat at his head asked:
'What is wrong with the man?' The second angel responded: 'A spell of black magic was cast on him'. The
first one asked: 'And who is responsible for this sorcery?' The second angel answered: 'It is Labid ibn alA'sam, the Jew'. The first angel asked again: 'What did he use to cast black magic on him?' The second
angel said: 'He used a comb and fallen hair'. The first angel asked: 'Where is it now?' The second angel said:
'It is inside the spadix of a palm tree beneath the stepping stone which is inside the well of Dharwan', at
which point the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, woke up. He said: 'O 'A'ishah, do
you not think that this is from Allah to inform me of the cause of my illness?' He then sent 'Ali [ibn Abi
Talib], al-Zubayr [ibn al-'Awwam] and 'Ammar [ibn Yasir] who drained the water of that well as one would
drain the dust of henna. They lifted the stone and got the spadix out and found therein some of the hair of
the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, as well a few teeth from his comb. They also
found with it a string with eleven knots knitted with needles. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed Surah alFalaq and Surah al-Nas (al-Mu'awwidhatayn). With each verse that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, read one knot was untied and the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, felt
some lightness. When the last knot was untied, the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, got up as if
he was released from a cord to which he was tied up. Gabriel, peace be upon him, kept saying: 'In the name
of Allah I cast this incantation on you to protect you from anything that might harm you and that Allah heals
you from the resentful envier and the evil eye'. Those around him said: 'O Messenger of Allah, should we not
head toward that evil person and kill him?' He said: 'As for me, Allah has cured me, and I dislike causing evil
to other people'. This is of the forbearance of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace”.
Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn Ja'far informed us> Abu 'Amr Muhammad ibn Ahmad alHiri> Ahmad ibn 'Ali al-Mawsili> Mujahid ibn Musa> Abu Usamah> Hisham ibn 'Urwa> his father> 'A'ishah,
may Allah be well pleased with her, who said: “A spell of black magic was cast on the Prophet, Allah bless
him and give him peace, such that he used to imagine that he did things when he did not. He was at my
place, one day, and he began imploring Allah in earnest. Then he said: 'Did you not feel, O 'A'ishah, that
Allah has answered me about that which I have enquired?' I said: 'And what is that, O Messenger of Allah?'
He said: 'Two angels came to me…', and he mentioned the whole story”. The whole story is narrated by
Bukhari from 'Ubayd ibn Isma'il from Abu Usamah. The same narration has different channels of
transmission in both the authentic collections of Bukhari and Muslim. The book Asbab Nuzul al-Qur'an
concludes here, and praise be to Allah, the One, the Munificent, and may Allah bless our master Muhammad,
his household and all those who follow them in excellence.