[13:13]
(He launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom He will…)

[13:13]. Nasr ibn Abi Nasr al-Wa'iz
informed us> Abu Sa'id 'Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Nusayr> Muhammad ibn Ayyub al-Razi> 'Abd alWahhab> 'Ali ibn Abi Sarah al-Shaybani> Thabit> Anas ibn Malik who reported that once the Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, sent a man to one of the Arab tyrants, saying: “Go and tell him to
come and see me”. He said: “O Messenger of Allah, he is too haughty to comply”. He said: “Go and tell him
to come and see me”. The man went and said to him: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, asks you to come and see him”. The man retorted: “What is Allah? Is He made of gold, silver or
copper?” The man went back and informed the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
saying: “I told you that he is too haughty to comply”. He said: “Go to him a second time and ask him to
come and see me”. He went and the man repeated exactly what he said in the previous occasion. The
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, asked the man to go and call him a third time, and the man
repeated what he said in the two previous occasions. The man said: “As he was talking to me, Allah sent
above his head a cloud which thundered and a bolt of lightning struck him and removed his skull”. Allah,
exalted is He, then revealed (He launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom He will while they
dispute (in doubt) concerning Allah, and He is mighty in wrath). According to the reports of Abu Salih, Ibn
Jurayj and Ibn Zayd, Ibn 'Abbas said: “This verse and the verse before it were revealed about 'Amir ibn alTufayl and Arbad ibn Rabi'ah. These two men went to see the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, and, as they were coming, one of the prophetic Companions said: 'O Messenger of Allah, here is
'Amir ibn al-Tufayl coming toward you'. He said: 'Leave him, Allah will guide him if He wants good for him'.
He proceeded along until he stood in front of the Prophet and said: 'O Muhammad, what do I get if I
become Muslim?' He said: 'You get what the Muslims get and you suffer what they suffer'. He said: 'In that
case put me in charge after you die'. He said: 'No, that is not up to me; that is up to Allah, exalted is He, 
98
and He appoints whoever He wills'. He said: 'In that case, put me in charge of the Arab nomads and you will
be in charge of the settlers'. The Prophet said: 'No!' He said: 'What are you going to give me, then?' He said:
'I will give you the reins of horses to use in military conquest'. He said: 'Do I not have them already?' This
man had told Arbad ibn Rabi'ah, that once he started talking to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace, he should go behind the Prophet and strike him with his sword. Arbad pulled out his sword about a
span but Allah, exalted is He, jammed it and he could not pull it out completely. When 'Amir started
gesturing to Arbad, The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, turned back and saw Arbad
handling his sword. He prayed: 'O Allah, deal with them for me as You will'. Allah, exalted is He, sent on
Arbad a thunderbolt, on a sunny day, and burned him. 'Amir ran away, saying: 'O Muhammad, you called
your Lord and He killed Arbad. By Allah, I will fill the land against you with unsaddled horses and unbearded
youths'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: 'Allah, exalted is He, will stop you
from doing that, as will the Aws and the Khazraj'. 'Amir then spent the night in the house of a woman from
Banu Salul. In the morning, he collected his weapons and left saying: 'By the Lat and al-'Uzza, would
Muhammad and his companion (meaning the angel of death) show themselves to me, I will stab them with
my spear'. When Allah, exalted is He, saw how he behaved, He sent him an angel who hit him with his wing
and thrust him on the dust. A huge gland, resembling a camel's gland, straightaway appeared on each of his
knees. He returned to the house of the woman from Banu Salul, saying: 'A gland like a camel's gland, and
dying in the house of the woman from Banu Salul', and he died on the back of his horse. Allah, exalted is
He, revealed about him this (Alike of you is he who hideth the saying and he who noiseth it abroad)

[13:10]
up to His saying (The prayer of disbelievers goeth (far) astray)

[13:14]”.

[13:30]
(… while they are disbelievers in the Beneficent…)

[13:30]. The commentators of the Qur’an said: “This
verse was revealed at the treaty of Hudaybiyyah when they were about to write the document of the treaty.
The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said to ‘Ali: ‘Write in the Name of Allah, the
Beneficent (al-Rahman), the Merciful’. Sahl ibn ‘Amr and the idolaters said: ‘We do not know anyone by the
name of the beneficent (al-Rahman) except the ruler of al-Yamamah’, meaning Musaylimah the liar, ‘rather,
write: in Your Name, O Allah!’ This is how the people of the pre-Islamic period used to write. And so Allah,
exalted is He, revealed about them this verse”. Said ibn ‘Abbas, according to the report of al-Dahhak: “This
was revealed about the unbelievers of Quraysh when the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said
to them (… Adore the Beneficent! They say; And what is the Beneficent? Are we to adore whatever thou
(Muhammad) biddest us?)

[13:31]
(Had it been possible for a Lecture to cause the mountains to move…)

[13:31]. Muhammad ibn 'Abd alRahman al-Nahwi informed me> Abu 'Amr Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Hiri> Abu Ya'la> Muhammad ibn
Isma'il ibn Salamah al-Ansari> Khalaf ibn Tamim> 'Abd al-Jabbar ibn 'Umar al-Ayli> 'Abd Allah ibn 'Ata'> his
grandmother Umm 'Ata', the client of al-Zubayr> al-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwam who said: “The Quraysh said to
the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace: 'You claim that you are a prophet who receives revelation,
and that Solomon was given the gift of wind and mountains, Moses the sea and Jesus brought the dead
back to life. Pray Allah to move for us these mountains, and cause rivers to spring out from this land so that
we can use it as plantations, and eat from them. Alternately, pray that Allah brings our dead ancestors to life
so that we speak with them; or pray that Allah turns this rock beneath you into gold so that we can do
without the winter and summer trips. Don't you claim that you are like these prophets?' We were around
him, when the revelation came to him. After he regained his normal composure, he said: 'By Him in Whose
Hand is my soul, He has given me all what you have asked, and if I wished it will all happen. However, He
has made me choose between the gate of mercy, such that your believers will come to believe or to leave
you to what you have chosen for yourselves such that you go astray from the gate of mercy, and your
believers will not believe. I have chosen the gate of mercy and that your believers will come to believe. Allah
also informed me that if He were to give what you asked for and you disbelieved after that, He would punish
you with a chastisement the like of which He has never inflicted on anyone of His creation'. It was revealed
(Naught hindreth Us from sending portents save that the folk of old denied them. And We gave Thamud the
she-camel- a clear portent- but they did wrong in respect of her…)

[13:38]
(And verily We sent messengers (to mankind) before thee, and We appointed for them wives and
offspring…)

[13:38]. Said al-Kalbi: “The Jews insulted the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, saying: ‘This man has no aspiration except for women and marriage. If he was really a prophet, as
he claims to be, the matter of prophethood would have preoccupied him from women’, and so Allah, exalted
is He, revealed this verse”.