[15:24]
(And verily We know the eager among you and verily We know the laggards)

[15:24]. Nasr ibn Abi Nasr alWa‘iz informed us> Abu Sa‘id ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Nusayr al-Razi> Muhammad ibn Ayyub al-Razi>
Sa‘id ibn Mansur> Nuh ibn Qays al-Tahi> ‘Amr ibn Malik> Abu’l-Jawza’> Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “A beautiful
woman used to pray behind the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, but she used to stand in
prayer behind all the women present. Some people used to proceed to the first row so as not to see her.
Others, on the other hand, used to pray in the last row on purpose, such that, upon bowing, they caught a
glimpse behind them [trying to see that woman]. And so, this verse was revealed (And verily We know the
eager among you and verily We know the laggards)”. Al-Rabi‘ ibn Anas said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, encouraged people to pray in the first row and, as a result, people jostled
with each other for a place at the first row. The houses of Banu ‘Udhrah were very far from the mosque and
so they said: ‘Let us sell our houses and buy houses close to the mosque’. Then, Allah, exalted is He,
revealed this verse”.

[15:47]
(And We remove whatever rancour may be in their breasts…)

[15:47]. ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Hamdan al-‘Adl
informed us> Ahmad ibn Ja‘far ibn Malik> ‘Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal> Muhammad ibn Sulayman ibn
Khalid al-Fahham> ‘Ali ibn Hashim> Kathir al-Nawwa’ who said: “I said to Abu Ja‘far: ‘So-and-so related to
me that he related from ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, may Allah be pleased with father and son, that this verse was
revealed about Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Ali, may Allah be well pleased with them (And We remove whatever
rancour may be in their breasts. As brethren, face to face, (they rest) on couches raised)’. He said: ‘By Allah,
it was revealed about them; and about whom else would it be revealed if not about them’. I asked: ‘What
rancour is that which is referred to here?’ He said: ‘The rancour of the time of ignorance; there was rancour
between the Banu Taym, the Banu ‘Adiyy and the Banu Hashim during the period of ignorance. When these
people embraced Islam, they loved each other. In one occasion, Abu Bakr had pain in his waist, so ‘Ali
warmed his hand and applied it on Abu Bakr’s waist. This verse was then revealed’ ”.

[15:49]
(Announce, (O Muhammad) unto My slaves that verily I am the Forgiving, the Merciful…)

[15:49]. Ibn alMubarak reported through his chain of transmission from a Companion of the Prophet, Allah bless him and
give him peace, that he said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, came out to us
from the door which the Banu Shaybah use and found us laughing. He said: 'I see that you are laughing!' He
retreated but when he reached the buttress, he came back to us and said: 'When I left, Gabriel, peace be
upon him, came to me and said: 'O Muhammad, Allah, glorious and majestic is He, says: Why are you
driving my servants to despair? (Announce, (O Muhammad) unto My slaves that verily I am the Forgiving,
the Merciful)' ' ”.

[15:87]
(We have given thee seven of the oft-repeated (verses) and the great Qur'an…)

[15:87]. Al-Husayn ibn alFadl said: “Seven caravans, belonging to the Jews of Qurayzah and al-Nadir from Busrah and Adhri'at,
arrived in the same day. They brought different kinds of linen, stuff of perfumes and jewels and sea stuff. 
100
The Muslims said: 'Had these riches been ours, we would have derived some strength from them and spent
them in the way of Allah'. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse. He said: 'I have given you seven
verses which are better than these seven caravans'. The authenticity of this report is evidenced by what
Allah, exalted is He, says after this verse (Strain not thine eyes toward that which We cause some wedded
pairs among them to enjoin)

[15:88]”.