[16:101] and also (Nothing of our revelation (even a single verse) do we abrogate or cause
be forgotten, but we bring (in place) one better or the like thereof…)”.

[16:1]
(The commandment of Allah will come to pass…)

[16:1]. Said Ibn 'Abbas: “When Allah, exalted is He,
revealed (The Hour drew nigh and the moon was rent in twain)

[16:4]
(He hath created man from a drop of fluid, yet behold! he is an open opponent)

[16:4]. This verse was
revealed about Ubayy ibn Khalaf al-Jumahi when he brought decaying bones to the Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, and then said: “O Muhammad, do you think Allah will bring this to life
after its decay?”. Something similar to this verse is Allah’s words in Surah Yasin (Hath not man seen that We
have created him from a drop of seed? Yet lo! He is an open opponent…)

[16:38]
(And they swear by Allah their most binding oaths (that) Allah will not raise up him who dieth…)

[16:38]. AlRabi‘ ibn Anas reported from Abu’l-‘Aliyah: “A Muslim man had a debt with an idolater and he went to ask
for it to be paid. As they were talking, the Muslim happened to say: ‘By Him in Whom I have hope after
death’, and the idolater retorted: ‘And you claim you will be resurrected after death?’ And he swore by Allah
that Allah will not resurrect those who die. Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse [to confirm the dead will
be resurrected]”.

[16:41]
(And those who became fugitives for the cause of Allah after they had been oppressed…)

[16:41]. This
verse was revealed about the Companions of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, in Mecca:
Bilal, Suhayb, Khabbab, ‘Ammar, and Abu Jandal ibn Suhayl. The idolaters seized them in Mecca, tortured
and harmed them. Later, Allah, exalted is He, made them settle down in Medina.

[16:43]
(And We sent not (as Our messengers) before thee other than men whom We inspired…)

[16:43]. This
verse was revealed about the idolaters of Mecca who denied the prophethood of Muhammad, Allah bless
him and give him peace. They said: “Allah is too great to have a human being as His messenger; could He 
101
not have sent an angel?”

[16:75-76]
(Allah coineth a similitude: (on the one hand) a (mere) chattel slave, who hath control of nothing, and (on
the other hand) one on whom we have bestowed a fair provision from Us, and he spendeth thereof secretly
and openly. Are they equal? Praise be to Allah! But most of them know not. And Allah coineth a similitude:
Two men, one of them dumb, having control of nothing, and he is a burden on his owner; whithersoever he
directeth him to go, he bringeth no good. Is he equal with one who enjoineth justice and followeth a straight
path (of conduct)?)

[16:75-76]. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya informed us> Abu Bakr
ibn al-Anbari> Ja‘far ibn Muhammad ibn Shakir> ‘Affan> Wuhayb> ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Uthman ibn Khuthaym>
Ibrahim> ‘Ikrimah> Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “This verse (Allah coineth a similitude: (on the one hand) a (mere)
chattel slave…) about Hisham ibn ‘Amr who used to spend his wealth openly and in secret and his client
Abu’l-Jawza’ who used to bid him to stop doing so. As for the verse (And Allah coineth a similitude: Two
men, one of them dumb, having control of nothing), the dumb who has control of nothing is Usayd ibn Abi
al-‘Is and the one who (enjoineth justice and followeth a straight path…) is ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan”.

[16:90]
(Lo! Allah enjoineth justice and kindness…)

[16:90]. Abu Ishaq Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim informed
us> Shu'ayb ibn Muhammad al-Bayhaqi> Makki ibn 'Abdan> Abu'l-Azhar> Rawh ibn 'Ubadah> 'Abd alHamid ibn Buhram> Shahr ibn Hawshab> 'Abd Allah ibn 'Abbas who said: “While the Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, was sitting in his House's courtyard in Mecca, 'Uthman ibn Maz'un
passed by and smiled at him. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: 'Will you not
sit down?' He sat down facing toward him. As the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace was talking
to 'Uthman, his eyes turned toward heaven, he looked upward for a while and then brought his gaze down
and looked down at the ground on his right hand side. Then, he looked away from his companion 'Uthman
toward where he gazed, moving his head as if trying to understand what he was being told. He then looked
up again toward heaven, as he did the first time, and kept looking up until his gaze was completely focused
on heaven. Then he was back with 'Uthman as he was initially. 'Uthman said: 'O Muhammad, I used to come
to see you and sit with you and I have never seen you do what you did this morning'. The Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, said: 'And what did you see me do?' He said: 'I saw you raising your eyes
toward heaven, you looked down on your right, and then you moved away from me and moved your head
as if trying to understand something which was being said to you'. The Prophet said: 'Did you catch all that?'
when 'Uthman said he did, the Prophet said: 'Gabriel came to me earlier on while you were sitting'. 'Uthman
asked: 'And what did he tell you?' He said: 'He told me (Lo! Allah enjoineth justice and kindness, and giving
to kinsfolk, and forbiddeth lewdness and abomination and wickedness. He exhorteth you in order that ye
may take heed)'. 'Uthman said: 'It was at that point that faith became firm in my heart and I loved
Muhammad, Allah bless him and give him peace' ”.

[16:101-102]
(And when We put a revelation in place of (another) revelation…)

[16:101-102]. This verse was revealed
when the idolaters said: “Muhammad is mocking his Companions; one day he commands them to do
something and the next day he forbids them from doing it, or brings instead something which is easier. He is
nothing but a calumniator who says things of his own invention”, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this
verse and the verse after it.

[16:103]
(And We know well that they say: Only a man teacheth him. The speech of him at whom they falsely hint is
outlandish…)

[16:103]. Abu Nasr Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Muzakki> Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Hamdan
al-Zahid> ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz> Abu Hisham al-Rifa‘i> Ibn Fudayl> Husayn> ‘Abd
Allah ibn Muslim who said: “We owned two Christian youths from the people of ‘Ayn Tamr, one called Yasar
and the other Jabr. Their trade was making swords but they also could read the Scriptures in their own
tongue. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, used to pass by them and listen to 
102
their reading. As a result, the idolaters used to say: ‘He is being taught by them!’ To give them the lie, Allah,
exalted is He, revealed (The speech of him at whom they falsely hint is outlandish, and this is clear Arabic
speech)”.

[16:106]
(Whoso disbelieveth in Allah after his belief…)

[16:106]. Said Ibn 'Abbas: “This verse was revealed about
'Ammar ibn Yasir. The idolaters had taken him away along with his father Yasir, his mother Sumayyah,
Suhayb [al-Rumi], Bilal [ibn Rabah], Khabbab [ibn al-Aratt] and Salim [the client of Hudhayfah] and tortured
them. As for Sumayyah, she was tied up between two camels and stabbed with a spear in her female organ.
She was told: 'You embraced Islam for the men', and was then killed. Her husband Yasir was also killed.
They were the first two persons who were killed in Islam. As for 'Ammar, he was coerced to let them hear
what they wanted to hear. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, was told that
'Ammar has renounced faith, but he said: 'Never, 'Ammar is filled with faith from his head to his toes; faith is
admixed with his flesh and blood!' 'Ammar then went to see the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, crying. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, wiped his tears with his own
hand and said: 'if they return to you, let them hear again what you told them'. Then, Allah, exalted is He,
revealed this verse”. Mujahid said: “This verse was revealed about some Meccans who accepted faith. The
Muslims of Medina wrote to them urging them to migrate and told them that they did not consider them part
of them unless they migrated. And so they left Mecca intending to migrate to Medina. The Quraysh caught
up with them on the way and coerced them to renounce their faith. It is about them that this verse was
revealed”.

[16:110]
(Then lo! thy Lord - for those who became fugitives after they had been persecuted …)

[16:110]. Said
Qatadah: “It was related to us that when Allah, exalted is He, revealed before this verse that the people of
Mecca who had embraced Islam would not be considered Muslim until they migrated to Medina, the people
of Medina wrote to their companions in Mecca to inform them of this. When they received the message, they
left Mecca but the idolaters caught up with them and took them back. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed
(Alif. Lam. Mim. Do men imagine that they will be left (at ease) because they say, We believe, and will not
be tested with affliction?)

[16:125-127]
(Call unto the way of thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation…)

[16:125-127]. Abu Mansur Muhammad
ibn Muhammad al-Mansuri informed us> 'Ali ibn 'Umar al-Hafiz> 'Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-
'Aziz> al-Hakam ibn Musa> Isma'il ibn 'Ayyash> 'Abd al-Malik ibn Abi Ghaniyyah> al-Hakam ibn 'Utaybah>
Mujahid> Ibn 'Abbas who said: “When the idolaters retreated from those who were killed at the Battle of
Uhud, The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, went there and saw a scene which he
strongly disliked. And he also saw Hamzah with his stomach ripped open, nose burnt and ears cut off. He
said: 'If it were not for the fear of causing more grief to the women or that it becomes a followed practice
after me, I would leave him until Allah, exalted is He, resurrect him from the bellies of predatory animals
and birds. I shall kill seventy men of them [of the disbelievers of Quraysh] in revenge', He then asked for a
mantle to cover him with it. When he covered his face, his feet remained uncovered and so he covered them
with some Bulrush. He then placed him forward and said 'Allah is the greatest' ten times. Then, all those
Muslim dead were brought, one by one, while the body of Hamzah was unmoved from its place, and the
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, prayed on them. And so He performed seventy prayers on
Hamzah. There were seventy Muslims who died in this battle. When they were buried and finished with,
Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Call unto the way of thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation) up to His
words (Endure thou patiently (O Muhammad). Thine endurance is only by (the help of) Allah…)

[16:127].
And so, he was patient and did not mutilate any one”. Isma'il ibn Ibrahim al-Wa'iz informed us> Abu'l-'Abbas 
103
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa al-Hafiz> 'Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz> Bishr ibn al-Walid alKindi> Salih al-Murri> Sulayman al-Taymi> Abu 'Uthman al-Nahdi> Abu Hurayrah who said: “When the
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, got closer to Hamzah, he saw that he was dead. Nothing that
he ever saw was more painful to his heart than that sight. He said: “By Allah, I will kill seventy of them in
return!” This verse was then revealed (If ye punish, then punish with the like of that wherewith ye were
afflicted. But if ye endure patiently, verily it is better for the patient)

[16:126]. Abu Hassan al-Muzakki
informed us> Abu'l-'Abbas Muhammad ibn Ishaq> Musa ibn Ishaq> Yahya ibn 'Abd al-Hamid al-Humani>
Qays ibn Abi Layla> al-Hakam> Muqassim> Ibn 'Abbas who reported that, on the day Hamzah was killed
and mutilated, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: “If I get my hand on the
Quraysh I will mutilate seventy men of them. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed (If ye punish, then punish
with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted. But if ye endure patiently, verily it is better for the patient),
upon which the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: 'I would rather be patient, O
Lord!' ” The commentators of the Qur'an said: “When the Muslims saw what the idolaters did to their dead
at the Battle of Uhud in terms of ripping open their stomachs, cutting off their male organs and mutilating
them in the most ugly way, they said: 'If Allah gives us a chance to get our hands on them, we will mutilate
them even worse than what they did; we shall maim them in a way that none of the Arabs did before to any
other Arab; and we shall do this and we shall do that'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, stopped at the body of his paternal uncle Hamzah with his nose and ears amputated, his male organs
cut off and his stomach ripped open. Hind bint 'Utbah had taken a piece of his liver, chewed it and
swallowed it but her stomach could not take it and she threw it up. When the Prophet, Allah bless him and
give him peace, heard of this, he said: 'She would have never entered hell if she did digest it; Hamzah is too
noble in the sight of Allah to allow any part of his body to enter hell'. When the Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, saw Hamzah [lying dead and mutilated], he had never seen, before that,
anything which was more painful to his heart. And so he said: 'May Allah's mercy be on you; you were, as
far as I know, someone who kept his ties of kinship and did always good deeds. Had it not been for the
grieving of those who survived of your family, it would have pleased me to leave you as you are until you
are resurrected [on the Day of Judgement] from different bellies. By Allah, if Allah, exalted is He, gives me
the opportunity to lay my hand on them, I will mutilate seventy men of them, for what they did to you'. But
Allah, exalted is He, revealed (If ye punish, then punish with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted. But
if ye endure patiently, verily it is better for the patient) and so the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace, said: 'I would rather be patient', and then he made amends for the oath he had made”. Here, we
need to mention how Hamzah was killed. 'Amr ibn Abi 'Amr al-Muzakki informed us> Muhammad ibn Makki>
Muhammad ibn Yusuf> Muhammad ibn Isma'il al-Ju'fi> Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allah> Hujayn ibn
al-Muthanna> 'Abd al-'Aziz ibn 'Abd Allah ibn Abi Salamah. And we were informed by Muhammad ibn
Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya> his father> Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Thaqafi> Sa'id ibn Yahya alUmawi> his father> Muhammad ibn Ishaq> 'Abd Allah ibn al-Fadl ibn 'Ayyash ibn Abi Rabi'ah> Sulayman
ibn Yasar> Ja'far ibn 'Amr ibn Umayyah al-Damri who said: “I travelled with 'Ubayd Allah ibn 'Adiyy ibn alKhiyar through Hums. While we were there 'Ubayd Allah said to me: 'Do you wish to go to visit Wahshiyy to
ask him how he killed Hamzah'. I said: 'If you want to'. A man said to us: 'You will find him in the courtyard
of his house; he is a man who is always drunk. However, if he is sober, he will speak in Arabic and you
might find what you are after'. When we got to him, we greeted him and he raised his head. We said: 'We
have come to you to tell us about your killing of Hamzah, may Allah have mercy on him'. He said: 'I will
relate to you exactly what I related to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, when he
asked me about the same. I was a slave of Jubayr ibn Mut'im ibn 'Adiyy ibn Nawfal whose uncle Tu'aymah
ibn 'Adiyy was killed at the Battle of Badr. When the Quraysh marched toward Uhud, Jubayr ibn Mut'im said
to me: 'You are free if you kill Hamzah, Muhammad's uncle, as a revenge for the killing of my uncle
Tu'aymah'. I went out with them. It is to be remembered that I am an Abyssinian who is expert in throwing
spears, like all Abyssinians, and I never missed my target. When the two sides met, I went looking for
Hamzah until I saw him in the middle of the army, like a white-and-black camel, slaughtering people with his
sword such that nothing stood in his way. By Allah, I was waiting for my moment, hiding behind a rock or
tree, so that he drew closer to me, when Siba' ibn 'Abd al-'Uzza passed me and went toward him. When
Hamzah, may Allah have mercy on him, saw him, he called him: 'Here, O son of a cutter of clitoris!' Then he
struck him on the head and, by Allah, he did not miss. I moved my spear about until I felt comfortable and
threw it at him. It caught him in the lower abdomen and the spear came out from his feet. He made a move
toward me and then collapsed and I left him to die. I went toward him, retrieved my spear and joined the
people at the camp. I did not want to kill anyone else, for I only killed him to gain my freedom. When I went 
104
back to Mecca, I was emancipated. I stayed there until Islam spread throughout it upon which I travelled to
al-Ta'if. In Ta'if, they sent emissaries to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and
mentioned that he does not harm emissaries. And so I went with them to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace. When he saw me, he said: 'Are you Wahshiyy?' and when I answered in the
affirmative, he asked again: 'You are the one who killed Hamzah?' I said: 'What happened is exactly as it
was related to you'. He said: 'Could you keep your face away from me?' I left. When the Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, died and Musaylimah the liar emerged to the people, I thought to go
and kill Musaylimah to cancel out my killing of Hamzah. I went out with people, and what happened to him
is now known' ”.

[16:110]”. Said Muqatil: “This verse was revealed about Mihja‘, the client of ‘Umar ibn alKhattab, who was the first Muslim to be killed at the Battle of Badr. ‘Amr ibn al-Hadrami struck him with a
bow which killed him. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said on that day: ‘The master of all
martyrs is Mihja‘. He will be the first one of this community to be called to the gate of heaven’. His wife and
parents were distraught because of his death, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed about them these verses,
explaining that they had to suffer trials and hardship for the sake of Allah, exalted is He”.