[17:59]. He read the next three verses 
99
and then the revelation came (Had it been possible for a Lecture to cause the mountains to move, or the
earth to be torn asunder…)”.

[17:29]
(And let not thy hand be chained to thy neck…)

[17:29]. Abu’l-Hasan Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Ali ibn
‘Imran informed us> Abu ‘Ali ibn Ahmad al-Faqih> Abu ‘Ubayd al-Qasim ibn Isma‘il al-Mahamili> Zakariyya
ibn Yahya al-Darir> Sulayman ibn Sulayman al-Juhani> Qays ibn al-Rabi‘> Abu Ishaq> Abu’l-Ahwas> ‘Abd
Allah who said: “A boy came to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: ‘My
mother asks you to give her this and that’. He said to him: ‘We do not have anything today’. The boy said:
‘She is asking you to give her your gown’. He took off his gown, gave it to him and remained in his house
denuded. Allah, glorified and exalted is He, then revealed (And let not thy hand be chained to thy neck nor
open it with a complete opening…)”. Said Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah: “As the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, was sitting with his Companions, a boy came to him and said: ‘O Messenger of Allah,
my mother asks you for a gown’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, did not have
any gown except the one he was wearing, and so he said to the boy: ‘Things turn up from time to time, so
come back to us another time’. He went to his mother and informed her but she said to him: ‘Tell him that
my mother asks you for the gown you are wearing’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, went inside his house, took off his gown and gave it to the boy and remained there naked. When
Bilal called for the prayer, people waited for the Prophet, Allah bless him and give, to emerge and lead them
in prayer but he did not come out. The Companions became worried. One of them entered in on him and
found him naked. Allah, glorious and exalted is He, then revealed (And let not thy hand be chained to thy
neck nor open it with a complete opening)”.

[17:53]
(Tell My bondmen to speak that which is kindlier…)

[17:53]. This was revealed about ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab,
may Allah be well pleased with him. An Arab man insulted him, and so Allah, exalted is He, commanded him
to pardon him. Said al-Kalbi: “The idolaters were in the habit of harming, verbally and physically, the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. When the latter complained to
the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.

[17:59]
(Naught hindereth Us from sending portents…)

[17:59]. Sa‘id ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ja‘far informed
us> Zahir ibn Ahmad> Abu’l-Qasim al-Baghawi> ‘Uthman ibn Abi Shaybah> Jarir ibn ‘Abd al-Hamid> alA‘mash> Ja‘far ibn Iyas> Sa‘id ibn Jubayr> Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “The people of Mecca asked the Prophet,
Allah bless him and give him peace, to turn al-Safa hill into gold and remove the mountains [surrounding
Mecca] for them so that they can engage in agriculture. It was said to him: ‘If you wish to wait for them
until We may select people from them [to believe in you], or you can give them what they have asked for.
But if they disbelieve after that, We will destroy them like We destroyed those before them’. He said: ‘No, I
would rather wait’. And so Allah, glorious and majestic is He, revealed this verse (Naught hindereth Us from
sending portents save that the folk of old denied them…)”.

[17:60]
(…and (likewise) the Accursed Tree in the Qur’an…)

[17:60]. Isma‘il ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Ahmad al-Wa‘iz
informed us> Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Faqih> Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Qattan> Ishaq ibn ‘Abd
Allah ibn Zurayr> Hafs ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman> Muhammad ibn Ishaq> Hakim ibn ‘Abbad ibn Hunayf> 
105
‘Ikrimah> Ibn ‘Abbas that he said: “When the tree of al-Zaqqum was mentioned in the Qur’an

[17:73]
(And they indeed strove hard to beguile thee (Muhammad) away from that wherewith We have inspired
thee…)

[17:73]. ‘Ata’ reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “This was revealed about the delegation of Thaqif. They
went to see the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and asked for unacceptable things.
They said: ‘Allow us to worship al-Lat for one year and make our valley inviolable — its trees, birds and wild
animals — just as you have made Mecca inviolable’. They persisted and insisted but the Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, rejected all their demands. They said: ‘We want the Arabs to know our
merit over them. If you dislike what we say and you are afraid that the Arabs say, you have given them that
which you did not give us, simply say that Allah has commanded you to do so’. The Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, did not answer them and this raised their hope. But ‘Umar shouted in
their faces: ‘Do you not see that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, did not answer
you because he does not like what you have come for?’ The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, was on the verge of giving them what they wanted. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this
verse”. Said Sa‘id ibn Jubayr: “The idolaters said to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace: ‘We will
not leave you alone until you come close to our idols, even if you only have to touch them with your fingers’.
The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said in reply: ‘And what harm is there in me doing so, if
Allah knows that I dislike it’. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse (And they indeed strove hard to
beguile thee (Muhammad) away from that wherewith We have inspired thee) up to His words (… accepted
thee as a friend)”. Said Qatadah: “It was mentioned to us that one night the Quraysh met the Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, alone and their meeting lasted until morning. They talked to him,
treated him as if he was one of their greats and chiefs and were agreeable to him. They said: ‘You have
brought something that no human being has brought before; you are our master and the son of our master’,
and they kept talking to him until he almost agreed to some of the things they wanted. But Allah, exalted is
He, protected him. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed this verse”.

[17:76]
(And they indeed wished to scare thee from the land…)

[17:76]. Said Ibn ‘Abbas: “The Jews resentfully
envied the settling of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, in Medina, and so they said: ‘The
Prophets were only sent in Syria; if you are truly a prophet, you should go over there. And if you go there,
we will believe and have faith in you’. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, liked what he heard
from them, since he was keen that they embrace Islam. He left Medina but when he had traversed a day’s
journey, Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”. ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Ghunm said: “The Jews went to see
the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: ‘If you are truthful about being a prophet of
Allah, then you should go to Syria, for the latter is the land of Resurrection and Mustering [on the Day of
Judgement] as it is the land of prophets’. He believed what they said. And when he went for the Battle of
Tabuk, he had the intention of going to Syria. But when he reached Tabuk, Allah, exalted is He, revealed
(And they indeed wished to scare thee from the land)”. Mujahid, Qatadah and al-Hasan said: “The people of
Mecca were on the verge of driving the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, out of
Mecca, when Allah, exalted is He, commanded him to leave. He revealed this verse to inform him of what
the people of Mecca intended to do”.

[17:80]
(And say: My Lord! Cause me to come in with a firm incoming…)

[17:80]. Said al-Hasan: “When the
unbelievers of Quraysh wanted to fetter the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and expel him
from Mecca, Allah, exalted is He, wanted the survival of the people of Mecca and commanded His Prophet,
Allah bless him and give him peace, to migrate to Medina. And He then revealed (And say: My Lord! Cause 
106
me to come in with a firm incoming and to go out with a firm outgoing…)”.

[17:85]
(They are asking thee concerning the Spirit…)

[17:85]. Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman al-Nahwi informed
us> Muhammad ibn Bishr ibn al-'Abbas>> Abu Labid Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Bishr> Suwayd> Sa'id> 'Ali
ibn Mushir> al-A'mash> Ibrahim> 'Alqamah> 'Abd Allah who said: “I was with the Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, at a plantation. He was leaning on a leafless palm branch when some Jews
came by us. Some of them said: 'Ask him about the Spirit'. Others said: 'Do not ask him lest he faces you
with what you dislike'. A group of them went to him and asked him: 'O Abu'l-Qasim, what do you say about
the Spirit?' He kept quiet. He then stood up and held his forehead with his hand and I knew that revelation
was coming to him. Allah, exalted is He, revealed (They are asking thee concerning the Spirit. Say: The
Spirit is by command of my Lord, and of knowledge ye have been vouchsafed but little)”. This was narrated
by Bukhari and Muslim, both from 'Umar ibn Hafs ibn Ghiyath from his father from al-A'mash. 'Ikrimah also
reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: “The Quraysh said to the Jews: 'Tell us something about which we should ask
this man'. They said: 'Ask him about the Spirit', and so this verse was revealed”. The commentators of the
Qur'an said: “The Jews gathered and said to the Quraysh when they asked them about Muhammad and his
case: 'Ask Muhammad about the Spirit and about the youths who were lost long ago in the past and about a
man who reached to the east and west of the earth. If he answers all these questions, he is not a prophet; if
he does not answer any of the questions, he is not a prophet; but if he answers some questions and refrains
from answering some others, he is a true prophet'. When they asked him, Allah, exalted is He, revealed
regarding the youths (Or deemest thou the people of the Cave and the Inscription are a wonder among Our
portents?)

[17:90]
(And they say: We will not put faith in thee till thou cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us)

[17:90]. 'Ikrimah reported that Ibn 'Abbas related that 'Utbah, Shaybah, Abu Sufyan, al-Nadr ibn al-Harith,
Abu'l-Bukhturi, al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah, Abu Jahl, 'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy ibn Umayyah, Umayyah ibn Khalaf,
and the chiefs of Quraysh gathered in front of the Ka'bah and said to each other: “Send for Muhammad,
speak to him, and argue with him so that others do not blame you about him”. They sent to him with a
message that the nobles of your people have gathered and want to speak with you. He came promptly,
thinking that they had changed their mind about him, for he was keen to see them guided and was pained
for their stubbornness. When he sat with them, they said: 'O Muhammad, by Allah we do not know of any
man among the Arabs who has introduced to his people what you have introduced. You have insulted our
forefathers, censored our religion, accused us of ignorance, slandered our idols, divided the community and
you have not left anything revolting except that you have placed it between us and you. Now, if you have
brought all this to seek wealth, we will collect from our wealth so that you become the richest among us; if
you seek status, we will make you our chief; if you seek kingship, we will make you our king; and if the jinn
that appears to you has completely overwhelmed you, we will spend our money to get you the right
medicine to cure you or discharge our duty toward you'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, said to them: 'I do not have what you accuse me of. I did not bring you what I brought to seek
wealth, status or kingship. Rather, it is Allah, glorious and majestic is He, Who has sent me to you as a
Messenger. He has revealed to me a Scripture and commanded me to be a carrier of good tiding as well as a
warner. I have conveyed to you the message of my Lord and advised you well. If you accept that which I
have brought you, it is your share in this world and in the next. And if you reject it, I will be patient with the
judgment of Allah until He judges between me and you'. They said: 'O Muhammad, if you do not accept our
offer, then you know that, compared to other people, we have a more restricted land, a tougher life and
much less wealth. So ask your Lord, Who has sent you with that which He has sent you, to remove from us
these mountains which have restricted our land and expand our country and run through it rivers like the
rivers of Syria and Iraq. And let Him resurrect our dead forefathers, and among those resurrected, let Him
resurrect Qusayy ibn Kilab, for he was a truthful old man, so that we ask them about whether what you say
is true or false. If you do what we ask for, we will believe you and, by the same token, know your status
with Allah, and that He has sent you as a Messenger, as you claim'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him 
107
and give him peace, said: 'I was not sent to bring what you have asked for. Rather, I came to you from
Allah, glorious is He, with that which He has sent me, and I have conveyed to you what I have been sent
with to you. If you accept it, it is your share in this world and in the next; but if you reject it, I will be patient
with Allah's judgement'. They said: 'If you do not do what we have asked for, then ask your Lord to send an
angel to confirm your message, and ask Him to provide you with gardens, treasures and palaces of gold and
silver which will suffice you from your needs, for you stand in the market place as we do, and strive to earn
a living as we do, in order that we appreciate your merit and position with your Lord, if you are truly a
messenger, as you claim to be'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: 'I will not
do it, nor am I someone to ask his Lord for such things, nor was I sent to you with this; He has rather sent
me as a bringer of good tidings and as a warner'. They said: 'In that case, cause the heaven to fall
piecemeal down on us, since you claim that your Lord can do so if He wills'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, said: 'That is up to Allah, He will do it if He wills'. One of them said: 'We will
not believe in you until you bring Allah and the angels as warrants. 'Abd Allah ibn Abi Umayyah al-Makhzumi
- the son of 'Atikah bint 'Abd al-Muttalib, the maternal aunt of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace - said: 'I will never believe in you until you get a ladder and climb up to heaven while I am watching
you, and bring an unfolded Scripture with you and a group of angels to testify about what you say'. The
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, left to his family very sad for failing to get his
people to follow him as well as for the antagonism they displayed toward him. And so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed (And they say: We will not put faith in thee till thou cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for
us…). Sa'id ibn Ahmad ibn Ja'far informed us> Abu 'Ali ibn Abi Bakr al-Faqih> Ahmad ibn al-Husayn ibn alJunayd> Ziyad ibn Ayyub> Hushaym> 'Abd al-Malik ibn 'Umayr> Sa'id ibn Jubayr who said: “I said to him
[to 'Abd al-Malik ibn 'Umayr]: 'The words of Allah (And they say: We will not put faith in thee till thou cause
a spring to gush forth from the earth for us) was it revealed about 'Abd Allah ibn Abi Umayyah?' He said:
'This is what they claim' ”.

[17:110]
(Say (unto mankind): Cry unto Allah, or cry unto the Beneficent…)

[17:110]. Said Ibn ‘Abbas: “One night in
Mecca, The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, stood up for the night vigil prayer. He
kept saying in his prostration: ‘O Beneficent, O Merciful!’ And so the idolaters said: ‘Muhammad used to call
unto one Allah; now he is calling unto two gods: Allah and the Beneficent. We do not know of anyone by the
name of the Beneficent except the beneficent of al-Yamamah (meaning Musaylimah the liar)’, and so Allah,
exalted is He, revealed this verse”. Said Maymun ibn Mihran: “At the beginning of revelation, the Messenger
of Allah, Allah bless him and give peace, used to write ‘In Thy name, O Allah’ until this verse was revealed
(Lo! It is from Solomon, and lo, it is: In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful)

[17:110]. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Ibrahim
ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya informed us> his father> Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Thaqafi> ‘Abd Allah ibn Muti‘
and Ahmad ibn Mani‘> Hushaym> Abu Bishr> Sa‘id ibn Jubayr> Ibn ‘Abbas who said regarding the words of
Allah, exalted is He (And thou (Muhammad), be not loud-voiced in thy worship nor yet silent therein…):
“This verse was revealed while the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, was in hiding in
Mecca. Whenever the unbelievers heard the Qur’an being recited, they reviled it and reviled the person who
had brought it. Hence, Allah, glorious and majestic is He, said to His Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace (And thou (Muhammad), be not loud-voiced in thy worship) i.e. upon reciting the Qur’an in prayer,
lest the idolaters hear it and revile the Qur’an, (nor yet silent therein) such that your Companions do not
hear you, (but follow a way between)”. This was narrated by Bukhari from Musaddid and by Muslim from
‘Amr al-Naqid, and both Musaddid and ‘Amr related it from Hushaym. ‘A’ishah, may Allah be well pleased
with her said: “This verse was revealed about the testification in prayer (tashahhud). One Bedouin used to
raise his voice upon saying: ‘Greetings and good salutation to Allah’, and so this verse was revealed”. ‘Abd
Allah ibn Shaddad said: “After the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, concluded the prayer, the
Bedouins of Banu Tamim were in the habit of supplicating loudly, saying: ‘O Allah, provide us with wealth
and offspring’, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”. Sa‘id ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ja‘far 
108
informed us> Abu ‘Ali al-Faqih> ‘Ali ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn Mubashshir al-Wasiti> Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad ibn
Harb> Abu Marwan> Yahya ibn Abi Zakariyya al-Ghassani> Hisham ibn ‘Urwah> his father> ‘A’ishah, may
Allah be well pleased with her, who said regarding the words of Allah, exalted is He (And thou (Muhammad),
be not loud-voiced in thy worship nor yet silent therein…): “It was revealed about making supplications”.

[17:85]. When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and
give him peace, migrated to Medina, Jewish doctors went to see him and said: ‘O Muhammad, we have
been informed that you said (of knowledge ye have been vouchsafed but little). Are you referring, by this, to
us or to your people?’ The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: ‘The knowledge
that you have is very little in comparison to the knowledge of Allah, glorified is He. Allah, exalted is He, has
given you something which will benefit you if only you practise it’. They said: ‘O Muhammad, how can you
say this when it is you who says (… and he unto whom wisdom is given, he truly hath received abundant
good…)