[18:9] up to the end of the story. And He revealed about the man who reached to the east and
west of the earth (They will ask thee of Dhu'l-Qarnayn. Say: I shall recite unto you a remembrance of Him)

[18:83]. And He revealed about the Spirit (They are asking thee concerning the Spirit…).

[18:28]
(Restrain thyself along with those who cry unto their Lord…)

[18:28]. The judge Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn alHasan al-Hiri related to us by dictation in Dar al-Sunnah on Friday after prayer, in the months of the year
410 a.h.> Abu'l-Hasan ibn 'Isa Ibn 'Abdawayh al-Hiri> Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Bushanji> al-Walid ibn
'Abd al-Malik ibn Musarrih al-Harrani> Sulayman ibn 'Ata' al-Harrani> Maslamah ibn 'Abd Allah al-Juhani>
his uncle Ibn Mashja'ah ibn Rub'i al-Juhani> Salman al-Farisi who said: “Those whose hearts were to be
reconciled (al-mu'allafati qulubuhum) - 'Uyaynah ibn Hisn, al-Aqra' ibn Habis and their families - came to the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: 'O Messenger of Allah, if only you could
sit at the front of the assembly and remove these people - meaning: Salman al-Farisi, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari
and other poor Muslims - and their smelly outer garments - because the only thing they had on them were
these woollen outer garments - from us, then we could sit with you, talk to you and learn from you!' As a
response, Allah, exalted is He, revealed (And recite that which hath been revealed unto thee of the Scripture
of thy Lord. There is none who can change His words, and thou wilt find no refuge beside Him. Restrain
thyself along with those who cry unto their Lord at morn and evening, seeking His Countenance)

[18:27-28]
up to His words (Lo! We have prepared for disbelievers Fire...)

[18:29], threatening them with hell. The
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, stood up and went looking for them. He found them at the
back of the mosque making remembrance of Allah, exalted is He. He said: 'Praise be to Allah Who did not
take away my soul until He commanded me to restrain myself with men of my community. It is with you
that I live and with you that I die' ”. (…and obey not him whose heart We have made heedless of Our
remembrance…)

[18:28]. Abu Bakr al-Harithi informed us> Abu'l-Shaykh al-Hafiz> Abu Yahya al-Razi> Sahl
ibn 'Uthman> Abu Malik> Juwaybir> al-Dahhak> Ibn 'Abbas who said regarding the words of Allah, exalted
is He (…and obey not him whose heart We have made heedless of Our remembrance…): “This verse was
revealed about Umayyah ibn Khalaf al-Jumahi. He asked the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, to
do something that he disliked. He asked him to chase away the poor from his assembly and draw to him,
instead, the leaders of Mecca. Allah, exalted is He, revealed (…and obey not him whose heart We have
made heedless of Our remembrance), i.e. sealed his heart such that he will never believe in Allah's divine
oneness (who followeth his own lust) i.e. idolatry”.

[18:83]
(They will ask thee of Dhu’l-Qarnayn…)

[18:83]. Said Qatadah: “The Jews asked the Prophet, Allah bless him
and give him peace, about Dhu’l-Qarnayn, and Allah, exalted is He, revealed these verses”.

[18:90]
(And they say: We will not put faith in thee till thou cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us)

[18:90]. ‘Ikrimah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas related that ‘Utbah, Shaybah, Abu Sufyan, al-Nadr ibn al-Harith,
Abu’l-Bukhturi, al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah, Abu Jahl, ‘Abd Allah ibn Ubayy ibn Umayyah, Umayyah ibn Khalaf,
and the chiefs of Quraysh gathered in front of the Ka‘bah and said to each other: “Send for Muhammad,
speak to him, and argue with him so that others do not blame you about him”. They sent to him with a
message that the nobles of your people have gathered and want to speak with you. He came promptly,
thinking that they had changed their mind about him, for he was keen to see them guided and was pained
for their stubbornness. When he sat with them, they said: ‘O Muhammad, by Allah we do not know of any
man among the Arabs who has introduced to his people what you have introduced. You have insulted our
forefathers, censored our religion, accused us of ignorance, slandered our idols, divided the community and
you have not left anything revolting except that you have placed it between us and you. Now, if you have
brought all this to seek wealth, we will collect from our wealth so that you become the richest among us; if
you seek status, we will make you our chief; if you seek kingship, we will make you our king; and if the jinn
that appears to you has completely overwhelmed you, we will spend our money to get you the right
medicine to cure you or discharge our duty toward you’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give 
109
him peace, said to them: ‘I do not have what you accuse me of. I did not bring you what I brought to seek
wealth, status or kingship. Rather, it is Allah, glorious and majestic is He, Who has sent me to you as a
Messenger. He has revealed to me a Scripture and commanded me to be a carrier of good tiding as well as a
warner. I have conveyed to you the message of my Lord and advised you well. If you accept that which I
have brought you, it is your share in this world and in the next. And if you reject it, I will be patient with the
judgment of Allah until He judges between me and you’. They said: ‘O Muhammad, if you do not accept our
offer, then you know that, compared to other people, we have a more restricted land, a tougher life and
much less wealth. So ask your Lord, Who has sent you with that which He has sent you, to remove from us
these mountains which have restricted our land and expand our country and run through it rivers like the
rivers of Syria and Iraq. And let Him resurrect our dead forefathers, and among those resurrected, let Him
resurrect Qusayy ibn Kilab, for he was a truthful old man, so that we ask them about whether what you say
is true or false. If you do what we ask for, we will believe you and, by the same token, know your status
with Allah, and that He has sent you as a Messenger, as you claim’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, said: ‘I was not sent to bring what you have asked for. Rather, I came to you from
Allah, glorious is He, with that which He has sent me, and I have conveyed to you what I have been sent
with to you. If you accept it, it is your share in this world and in the next; but if you reject it, I will be patient
with Allah’s judgement’. They said: ‘If you do not do what we have asked for, then ask your Lord to send an
angel to confirm your message, and ask Him to provide you with gardens, treasures and palaces of gold and
silver which will suffice you from your needs, for you stand in the market place as we do, and strive to earn
a living as we do, in order that we appreciate your merit and position with your Lord, if you are truly a
messenger, as you claim to be’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: ‘I will not
do it, nor am I someone to ask his Lord for such things, nor was I sent to you with this; He has rather sent
me as a bringer of good tidings and as a warner’. They said: ‘In that case, cause the heaven to fall
piecemeal down on us, since you claim that your Lord can do so if He wills’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, said: ‘That is up to Allah, He will do it if He wills’. One of them said: ‘We will
not believe in you until you bring Allah and the angels as warrants. ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi Umayyah al-Makhzumi
— the son of ‘Atikah bint ‘Abd al-Muttalib, the maternal aunt of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace — said: ‘I will never believe in you until you get a ladder and climbed up to heaven while I am
watching you, and bring an unfolded Scripture with you and a group of angels to testify about what you
say’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, left to his family very sad for failing to get
his people to follow him as well as for the antagonism they displayed toward him. And so Allah, exalted is
He, revealed (And they say: We will not put faith in thee till thou cause a spring to gush forth from the earth
for us…). Sa‘id ibn Ahmad ibn Ja‘far informed us> Abu ‘Ali ibn Abi Bakr al-Faqih> Ahmad ibn al-Husayn ibn
al-Junayd> Ziyad ibn Ayyub> Hushaym> ‘Abd al-Malik ibn ‘Umayr> Sa‘id ibn Jubayr who said: “I said to him
[to ‘Abd al-Malik ibn ‘Umayr]: ‘The words of Allah (And they say: We will not put faith in thee till thou cause
a spring to gush forth from the earth for us) was it revealed about ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi Umayyah?’ He said:
‘This is what they claim’ ”.

[18:109]
(Say: Though the sea became ink for the Words of my Lord…)

[18:109]. Ibn 'Abbas said: “When the
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, told them (… and knowledge ye have been vouchsafed but
little), the Jews said: 'How can this be when we have been given the Torah? He who has been given the
Torah has been given abundant goodness!' Upon which this verse was revealed (Say: Though the sea
became ink for the Words of my Lord…)”.

[18:110]
(And whoever hopeth for the meeting with his Lord…)

[18:110]. Said Ibn 'Abbas: “This verse was revealed
about Jundub ibn Zuhayr al-'Amiri who said: 'I do the deed seeking Allah but I get happy when other people
come to know about it'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said to him: 'Allah,
exalted is He, is pure and does not accept except that which is pure. He does not accept that in which other
than Him is associated'. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed this verse”. Said Tawus: “A man said: 'O Prophet
of Allah, I love striving in the way of Allah, but I also love to be seen!' Allah, exalted is He, revealed this
verse [about this]”. Mujahid said: “A man went to see the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and
said: 'I give alms and keep my ties of kinship and do this only for Allah, glorious and exalted is He. However, 
110
when other people mention this and praise me for it, it makes me happy and I like it'. The Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, did not respond to him. Then, Allah, exalted is He, revealed (And
whoever hopeth for the meeting with his Lord, let him do righteous work, and make none sharer of the
worship due unto his Lord)”.