[19:64]
(We (angels) come not down save by commandment of thy Lord…)

[19:64]. Isma'il ibn Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad ibn Hamawayh informed us> Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ma'mar al-Shami> Ishaq ibn Muhammad
ibn Ishaq al-Rus'ani> his grandfather> al-Mughirah> 'Umar ibn Dharr> his father> Sa'id ibn Jubayr> Ibn
'Abbas who said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said [to Gabriel, peace be
upon him]: 'O Gabriel, what prevents you from visiting us more often than you do?' And so this verse was
revealed (We (angels) come not down save by commandment of thy Lord. Unto Him belongeth all that is
before us and all that is behind us and all that is between those two, and thy Lord was never forgetful). This
was a response to Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace”. This was
narrated by Bukhari from Abi Nu'aym from 'Umar ibn Dharr. Mujahid said: “The angel [Gabriel] took quite a
while to come to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. When he finally came to him
he said: 'Did I take too long to come to you?' The Prophet said he did, upon which the angel said: 'Why
should I not delay my coming when you [the community of the believers] do not polish your teeth by using
small sticks (siwak), do not cut your nails and do not clean the joints of your fingers'. And then he added
(We (angels) come not down save by commandment of thy Lord…)”. 'Ikrimah, al-Dahhak, Qatadah, Muqatil
and al-Kalbi said: “Gabriel, peace be upon him, failed to come to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace, when his people asked him about the people of the Cave, Dhu'l-Qarnayn and the Spirit. He did not
know what to answer them and was hoping that Gabriel, peace be upon him, would come to him with an
answer. When his coming was delayed, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, was
very aggrieved. When Gabriel, peace be upon him, finally came, the Prophet said to him: 'You delayed your
coming so much that I had some misgivings, and I have missed you'. Gabriel, peace be upon him, said: 'I
have missed you more but I am only a slave who obeys orders. When I am sent, I come; and when I am
kept back, I remain where I am kept'. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed (We (angels) come not down save
by commandment of thy Lord…)”.

[19:66]
(And man saith: When I am dead, shall I forsooth be brought forth alive?)

[19:66]. Al-Kalbi said: “This verse
was revealed about Ubayy ibn Khalaf when he held with his hand decaying bones and said: ‘Muhammad
made a claim to you that we will be resurrected after we die!’ ”.

[19:77]
(Hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in Our revelations…)

[19:77]. Abu Ishaq al-Tha'alibi informed us>
'Abd Allah ibn Humayd> Makki ibn 'Abdan> 'Abd Allah ibn Hashim> Abu Mu'awiyah> al-A'mash> Abu'lDuha> Masruq> Khabbab ibn al-Aratt who said: “I had a debt with al-'As ibn Wa'il and I went to settle it
with him. He said: 'By Allah, I will not pay you until you disbelieve in Muhammad'. I said: 'No, by Allah, I will
not disbelieve in Muhammad until you die and be resurrected'. He said: 'In that case, when I die and am
resurrected I will have children and wealth and I will be able to pay you'. And so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed this verse”. Abu Nasr Ahmad ibn Ibrahim informed us> 'Abd Allah ibn Muhammad al-Zahid> alBaghawi> Abu Khaythamah> 'Ali ibn Muslim> Waki'> al-A'mash Abu'l-Duha> Masruq> Khabbab who said:
“I used to be a blacksmith and I had an unpaid debt with al-'As ibn Wa'il and so I went to him to ask for it to
be paid. He said to me: 'I will not pay you until you disbelieve in Muhammad, peace be upon him'. I said: 'I
will not disbelieve in him until you die and be resurrected'. He said: 'Will I be resurrected after death? In that
case, I will pay you back when I return to my wealth [after the resurrection]'. This verse was then revealed
(Hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in Our revelations and saith: Assuredly I shall be given wealth and
children?)”. This was narrated by Bukhari from al-Humaydi from Sufyan and also by Muslim from al-Ashajj
from Waki'; both Waki' and Sufyan related it from al-A'mash. Al-Kalbi and Muqatil said: “Khabbab ibn al-Aratt
used to be a blacksmith working for al-'As ibn Wa'il al-Sahmi who used to delay his payment. One day,
Khabbab went to him to ask him for his payment when al-'As said to him: 'I do not have anything today to 
111
pay you with'. Khabbab said: 'I am not leaving until you pay me'. Al-'As retorted: 'O Khabbab, what is wrong
with you? You did not use to be like this; you used to ask nicely for your payment'. Khabbab said: 'That was
because I was following your religion, as for now I have a different religion: I follow Islam'. Al-'As said: 'Do
you not claim that there is gold, silver and silk in the Garden?' Khabbab said: 'Indeed!' Al-'As said: 'Then
wait for me until I pay you in the Garden', he said this mockingly 'by Allah, if what you say is true, I will
have a better share of it than you', and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Hast thou seen him who
disbelieveth in Our revelations) meaning: al-'As”.