[21:1]. They again became apprehensive and waited for the nearing last Hour. When a long time had
passed [and nothing happened] they said: 'O Muhammad, nothing of that with which you have threatened
us happened'. And Allah, exalted is He, revealed (The commandment of Allah will come to pass). The
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, jumped up when he heard this and people raised their heads
[to heaven]. The revelation (so seek not ye to hasten it) came, and people felt relieved. And when this verse
was revealed, the Messenger of Allah, Allah, bless him and give him peace, said: 'I and the last Hour are like
this - and he pointed with his finger - ; it almost came before me' ”. Other unbelievers said: “The judgement
is already here; it is chastisement through the sword”. This is the answer of al-Nadr ibn al-Harith when He
said (O Allah! If this be indeed the truth from Thee, then rain down stones on us…)

[21:101]
(Lo! those unto whom kindness hath gone forth before from Us…)

[21:101]. Abu 'Umar ibn Ahmad ibn
'Umar al-Mawardi informed us> 'Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Nasr al-Razi> Muhammad ibn Ayyub> 'Ali ibn
al-Madini> Yahya ibn Nuh> Abu Bakr ibn 'Ayyash> 'Asim> Abu Ruzayn> Abu Yahya> Ibn 'Abbas who said:
“There is one verse about which people never ask me; I do not know whether they know it and, therefore,
do not have to ask about it; or do not know it at all and, hence, do not ask about it”. He was asked: “And
what is this verse?” He said: “When the verse (Lo! Ye (idolaters) and that which ye worship beside Allah are
fuel of hell. Thereunto ye will come)

[21:98], the Quraysh were distressed and said: 'He is insulting our
idols'. Ibn al-Ziba'ra came along and asked them: 'What is wrong?' They said: 'He is insulting our idols!'
'What does he say', he pressed them. They said: 'He said (Lo! Ye (idolaters) and that which ye worship
beside Allah are fuel of hell. Thereunto ye will come)'. He said: 'Summon him for me!' When the Messenger
of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, was called, he said to him: 'O Muhammad, does this apply
specifically to our idols or to all that is worshipped beside Allah?' He said: 'No, it applies to all that is
worshipped besides Allah'. Ibn al-Ziba'ra said: 'You have been dumbfounded by the Lord of this building',
meaning the Ka'bah. 'Do you not claim that the angels are righteous servants and that Jesus is a righteous
servant and that 'Uzayr is a righteous servant? Well, the Banu Mulayh worship the angels, the Christians 
112
worship Jesus and the Jews worship 'Uzayr'. Upon hearing this, the people of Mecca cried out [of jubilation],
and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Lo! those unto whom kindness hath gone forth before from Us) the
angels, Jesus and 'Uzayr (they will be far removed from thence)”.

[21:98].