[22:73]. He also mentioned the scheme of the deities and compared it to cobweb. Upon
hearing this, they said: 'See how Allah mentions gnats and spiders in the Qur'an revealed to Muhammad;
what is the use of this?' And so Allah revealed this”.

[22:11]
(And among mankind is he who worshippeth Allah upon a narrow marge…)

[22:11]. The commentators of
the Qur'an said: “This verse was revealed about some Bedouins who used to travel from the desert to
Medina to see the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. If one of them had, during such
visits, good health, or his mare gave birth to seemly foals or his wife gave him a boy, such that his wealth
and cattle multiplied - he would be pleased and well contended. He would say: 'Since I embraced this
religion, I have not seen anything but good'. If, on the other hand, he fell ill, during such visits, or his wife
gave birth to a girl, or his foals were stillborn, such that he lost his wealth, or such that the payment of alms
to him was delayed - the devil would come to him and whisper: 'Since you embraced this religion, you have
not gained anything but evil', and thus he would renounce his religion. Allah, exalted is, therefore, revealed
(And among mankind is he who worshippeth Allah upon a narrow marge)”. 'Atiyyah reported that Abu Sa'id
al-Khudri said: “A Jewish man who had embraced Islam lost his sight, wealth and children. He thought that
Islam was ill-omened and so he went to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said:
'Discharge me!' The Prophet said: 'you do not get discharged from Islam'. The man said: 'I did not gain any
good from this religion of mine!' The Prophet said: 'O Jew, Islam smelts men as fire smelts the dross of iron,
silver and gold'. Then the verse (And among mankind is he who worshippeth Allah upon a narrow marge)
was revealed”.

[22:19]
(These Twain (the believers and disbelievers) are two opponents who contend concerning their Lord…)

[22:19]. Abu 'Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Muzakki informed us> 'Abd al-Malik ibn al-Hasan ibn
Yusuf> Yusuf ibn Ya'qub al-Qadi> 'Umar ibn Marzuq> Shu'bah> Abu Hashim> Abu Majlaz> Qays ibn 'Ubad
who reported that he heard Abu Dharr say: “I swear by Allah that this verse (These Twain (the believers and
disbelievers) are two opponents who contend concerning their Lord) was revealed about the following six:
Hamzah, 'Ubaydah, 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, 'Utbah, Shaybah, and al-Walid ibn 'Utbah”. This was narrated by
Bukhari from Hajjaj ibn Minhal from Hushaym from Abu Hashim. Abu Bakr ibn al-Harth informed us> Abu'lShaykh al-Hafiz> Muhammad ibn Sulayman> Hilal ibn Bishr> Yusuf ibn Ya'qub>> Sulayman al-Taymi> Abu
Majlaz> Qays ibn 'Ubad> 'Ali who said: “The words of Allah (These Twain (the believers and disbelievers)
are two opponents who contend concerning their Lord) up to (Taste the doom of burning)

[22:22] was
revealed about us and about our duels on the Day of Badr”. Said Ibn 'Abbas: “This refers to the people of
the Book. The latter said to the believers: 'We have a better right to Allah than you; our Scripture is older
than yours and our prophet came before your prophet'. The believers said: 'It is us who have a better right
to Allah than you; we believe in Muhammad and in your prophet as we believe in all revealed Scriptures.
You have recognized our prophet but refrained from believing in him. You disbelieved in him only because
you envied him resentfully'. This was their issue of contention regarding their Lord. And so Allah, exalted is
He, revealed this verse about them”. This opinion is also the view of Qatadah.

[22:39]
(Sanction is given unto those who fight because they have been wronged…)

[22:39]. The commentators of
the Qur’an said: “The idolaters from among the people of Mecca were in the habit of harming the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. These Companions used to
come always either beaten or with their skulls bashed in. They complained to the Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, about this situation and he persistently told them: ‘Be steadfast, for I have
not been commanded to fight’. This continued until the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, migrated, upon which Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”. Ibn ‘Abbas said: “When the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, was taken out of Mecca, Abu Bakr, may Allah be
well pleased with him, said about him: ‘We are unto Allah, and unto Him we shall return; we shall surely
perish’. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed (Sanction is given unto those who fight because they have been
wronged; and Allah is indeed Able to give them victory). Abu Bakr said: ‘I knew at that point that there will 
113
be fighting’ ”.

[22:52]
(Never sent We a messenger or a prophet before thee…)

[22:52]. The commentators of the Qur'an said:
“When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, saw that his people were shunning him,
he was aggrieved by their rejection of the message he brought them and he secretly wished that Allah,
exalted is He, reveals something to him which would bring him and his people closer to each other, keen as
he was to see them accept faith. One day, he sat in one of the congregations of Quraysh which attracted a
huge number of its members, and he wished that Allah, exalted is He, does not reveal to him on that day
anything that might repel them from him. Allah, exalted is He, revealed to him then Surah al-Najm (By the
star when it stetteth…) [Surah 53]. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, recited it
but when he reached (Have ye thought upon al-Lat and al-'Uzza, and Manat, the third, the other)