[25:60], and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse. He said (Say) to them,
the Beneficent Whom you deny (He is my Lord; there is no god save Him…)”.

[25:10]
(Blessed is He Who, if He will, will assign thee better than (all) that…)

[25:10]. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Ibrahim al-Muqri' informed us> Ahmad ibn Abi al-Furat> 'Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Ya'qub Bukhari>
Muhammad ibn Humayd ibn Farqad> Ishaq ibn Bishr> Juwaybir> al-Dahhak> Ibn 'Abbas who said: “When
the idolaters ridiculed the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, for his poverty, saying [as
reported by Allah's words in 25:7] (What aileth this messenger (of Allah) that he eateth food and walketh in
the markets?), the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, felt sad. Gabriel, peace be upon
him, came from his Lord to console him, saying: 'Peace be with you, O Messenger of Allah. The Lord of
might greets you with the greeting of peace and says to you (We never sent before thee any messengers
but lo! They ate food and walked in the markets…)

[25:20]', i.e. they seek their livelihood in this world”. He
said: “As Gabriel, peace be upon him, and the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, were talking,
Gabriel, peace be upon him, started melting until he shrunk to the size of a lentil. The Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, asked: 'What happened that made you shrink to the size of a lentil?' He
said: 'O Muhammad, a gate of heaven which has never been opened before has opened just now, and I fear
that your people will be chastised for ridiculing you regarding your poverty'. The Prophet and Gabriel, peace
be upon them, started crying. Then Gabriel returned to his initial state and said: 'Good news for you, O
Muhammad! Here is Ridwan, the keeper of the Garden who brings you contentment from your Lord'. Ridwan
came along holding a bundle of shining light, greeted them with the greeting of peace, and then said: 'O
Muhammad, the Lord of might greets you with the greeting of peace and says to you: here are the keys to
the stores of this world which are like the wing of gnat compared with what you have with Me in the
Afterlife, which will remain undiminished'. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, looked at
Gabriel, peace be upon him, as if seeking his counsel, upon which Gabriel struck the ground with his hand
and said: 'Humble yourself to Allah!' And so he said: 'O Ridwan, I have no need for them; poverty is much
beloved to me. I would rather be a patient, grateful slave'. Ridwan answered: 'You are right, may Allah
make things right through you'. Then a call came from heaven, Gabriel raised his head and saw all the gates 
122
of heaven, up to the Throne, opened. Allah, exalted is He, inspired the Garden of Eden to lower one of its
branches which had a bunch on which there was a room made of green chrysolite and had seventy
thousand doors made of rubies. Gabriel, peace be upon him said: 'O Muhammad, look up!' When he looked
up, he saw the stations and rooms of all the prophets, and saw his station above that of all other prophets,
as a special merit to him. A crier cried: 'O Muhammad, are you pleased?' The Prophet, Allah bless him and
give him peace, answered: 'I am pleased; and please keep in store with You that which You wanted to give
me in this world in exchange for intercession on Day of Judgement' ”. It is also reported that this verse was
brought down by Ridwan (Blessed is He Who, if He will, will assign thee better than (all) that - Gardens
underneath which rivers flow - and will assign thee mansions).

[25:27]
(On the day when the wrong-doer gnaweth his hands…)

[25:27]. ‘Ata’ al-Khurasani reported that Ibn ‘Abbas
said: “Ubayy ibn Khalaf used to go to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, keep his company
and listen to his speech without believing in him. ‘Uqbah ibn Abi Mu‘ayt, then, rebuked him for doing so, and
so this verse was revealed about it”. Said al-Sha‘bi: “ ‘Uqbah [ibn Abi Mu‘ayt] was a friend of Umayyah ibn
Khalaf. When ‘Uqbah embraced Islam, Umayyah said to him: ‘I do not want to ever see you if you follow
Muhammad’. ‘Uqbah disbelieved again and renounced Islam to please his friend, and so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed this verse”. Other commentators of the Qur’an said: “Ubayy ibn Khalaf and ‘Uqbah ibn Abi Mu‘ayt
were allies. It was the habit of ‘Uqbah, upon returning from a travel, to invite the nobles of his people to eat
with him. ‘Uqbah also used to keep the company of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace. He returned one day from one of his travels, made some food and invited people and the Messenger
of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, to eat. When the food was placed before the invitees, the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said to him: ‘I will not eat your food until you bear
witness that there is no deity except Allah and that I am the Messenger of Allah’. ‘Uqbah said: ‘I bear
witness that there is no deity except Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah’, upon which the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, ate from his food. Ubayy was absent on that
occasion. But when he was informed of what had happened, he said to ‘Uqbah: ‘You have renounced the
religion of your forefathers?’ ‘Uqbah said: ‘By Allah, I did not. I had a man in my house who refused to eat
my food unless I bore witness to him and I was ashamed to let him leave my house without him eating, and
so I bore witness to him and he ate my food’. Ubayy said to him: ‘I will never be happy with you until you
go to him, spit on his face and step on his neck’. ‘Uqbah did just that, and the Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, said to him: ‘If I ever meet out of Mecca, I will behead you’. ‘Uqbah was later
killed while in captivity at Badr. As for Ubayy ibn Khalaf, the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace,
killed him in a duel at Uhud. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed about ‘Uqbah and Ubayy this verse”. Said
al-Dahhak: “When ‘Uqbah spat on the face of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
his spit split into two and flew back on ‘Uqbah’s face. This caused both his cheeks to burn and the scars
resulting from this burning remained visible until he died”.

[25:68-70]
(And those who cry not unto any other god along with Allah…)

[25:68-70]. Abu Ishaq al-Tha‘alibi informed
us> al-Hasan ibn Ahmad al-Makhladi> al-Mu’ammil ibn al-Hasan ibn ‘Isa> al-Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn alSabbah al-Za‘farani> Hajjaj> Ibn Jurayj> Ya‘la ibn Muslim> Sa‘id ibn Jubayr> Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “Some
idolaters who had committed many murders and fornicated numerous times went to the Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: ‘What you say and call for is good, if only you could inform us
whether there is any expiation for the things we have committed’. As a response, this verse was revealed
(And those who cry not unto any other god along with Allah) up to His words (Allah is ever Forgiving,
Merciful)

[25:70]”. This was narrated by Muslim> Ibrahim ibn Dinar> Hajjaj. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn
Yahya al-Muzakki informed us> his father> Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Thaqafi> Ibrahim al-Hanzali and
Muhammad ibn al-Sabbah> Jarir> Mansur and al-A‘mash> Abu Wa’il> ‘Amr ibn Shurahbil> Abu Maysarah>
‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud who said: “I asked the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace: ‘What
is the greatest sin?’ He said: ‘It is to ascribe an equal to Allah when it is Him Who has created you’. I asked:
‘What comes after that?’ he said: ‘It is to kill your child for fear that he might compete with you over food’. I
asked: ‘What comes after that?’ he said: ‘It is to commit adultery with the wife of your neighbour’. Allah,
exalted is He, then revealed these verses to confirm his answers (And those who cry not unto any other god 
123
along with Allah, nor take the life which Allah hath forbidden save in (course of) justice, nor commit
adultery…)”. This was narrated by Bukhari> Musaddid> Yahya and also by Muslim> ‘Uthman ibn Abi
Shaybah> Jarir. Abu Bakr ibn al-Harith informed us> ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Ja‘far> Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim> Isma‘il ibn Ishaq> al-Haruth ibn al-Zubayr> Abu Rashid, the client of alLahibiyyin> Sa‘id ibn Salim al-Qaddah> Ibn Jurayh> ‘Ata’> Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “Wahshiyy went to the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: ‘I came to you seeking sanctuary; so
grant me sanctuary in order that I can hear the speech of Allah’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, said to him: ‘I had wished to see you without sanctuary, but since you have asked me
for sanctuary, you are in my sanctuary until you hear the speech of Allah’. Wahshiyy said: ‘I have associated
others with Allah, killed souls which Allah, exalted is He, has made forbidden and committed adultery. Does
Allah accept my repentance?’ The Messenger of Allah, exalted is He, did not answer him and then the verse
(And those who cry not unto any other god along with Allah, nor take the life which Allah hath forbidden
save in (course of) justice, nor commit adultery…) was revealed. The Prophet recited it to Wahshiyy but the
latter said: ‘I see here a condition; it is possible that I may not do any righteous works. I will stay in your
sanctuary so that I can hear the speech of Allah, exalted is He’. The verse: (Lo! Allah forgiveth not that a
partner should be ascribed unto Him. He forgiveth (all) save that to whom He will)