[29:1-2], and the Muslims of Medina wrote to them to inform them about it. The
Muslims of Mecca vowed to each other to leave Mecca and fight the idolaters of Mecca, were they to catch
up with them, until they join Allah or escape to Medina. The idolaters did catch up with them. Some of them
died fighting while others were able to flee. Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Then lo! thy Lord - for those who
became fugitives after they had been persecuted, and then fought and were steadfast…)”.

[29:1-2]
(Alif. Lam. Mim. Do men imagine that they will be left (at ease) because they say, We believe, and will not
be tested with affliction?)

[29:1-2]. Said al-Sha‘bi: “These verses were revealed about some people in Mecca
who embraced Islam. The Companions of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, in Medina wrote
to them saying that their faith and embracing of Islam will not be accepted from them until they emigrate
from Mecca. For this reason, they left Mecca with the intention of joining Medina. However, the idolaters
caught up with them and harmed them. These verses were, therefore, revealed about them. The Muslims of
Medina then wrote back and said to them that such-and-such verses were revealed about you. Those
Muslims in Mecca said: ‘We will leave and fight whoever follows us’. They left Mecca and were pursued by
the idolaters. Fighting ensued between them; some were killed and some escaped safe. Allah, exalted is He,
therefore revealed about them (Then lo! Thy Lord—for those who become fugitive after they had been
persecuted…)

[29:8]
(We have enjoined on man kindness to parents…)

[29:8]. The commentators of the Qur’an said: “This was
revealed about Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas. When the latter embraced Islam, his mother Hamnah said to him: ‘O
Sa‘d, I heard that you have renounced your old religion. By Allah, I will not take shelter under any roof to
protect me from the sun and wind, nor will I eat or drink, until you disbelieve in Muhammad and revert to
your old religion’. Sa‘d was the dearest of her sons to her, but he refused to do as she wanted. For three
days, his mother did not eat, drink or take shelter under the shade until it was feared that she may perish.
At that point, Sa‘d went to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and complained to him. Allah,
exalted is He, revealed as a response this verse as well as the verse in Surah Luqman

[29:10]
(Of mankind is he who saith: We believe in Allah…)

[29:10]. Said Mujahid: “This verse was revealed about
some people who declared faith with their tongues. However, when Allah tested them with trials or
calamities regarding their own persons, they succumbed”. Said al-Dahhak: “This verse was revealed about
some Meccan hypocrites who displayed faith but showed their belief in idolatry whenever they were
harmed”. ‘Ikrimah also reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “This verse was revealed about the believers who
were expelled to Badr by the idolaters and so they renounced their faith. It is about these people that the
verse (Lo! As for those whom the angels take (in death) while they wrong themselves…)

[29:60]
(And how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision!)

[29:60]. Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn
Muhammad al-Tamimi informed us> Abu Muhammad ibn Hayyan> Ahmad ibn Ja‘far al-Jamal> ‘Abd alWahid ibn Muhammad al-Bajali> Yazid ibn Harun> Hajjaj ibn Minhal> al-Zuhri (who is ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn
‘Ata’)> ‘Ata’> Ibn ‘Umar who said: “We went out with the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, and walked with him until he entered one of the fields of the Helpers and started picking dates and
eating them. He said: ‘O Ibn ‘Umar, why do you not eat?’ I said: ‘I do not feel like it, O Messenger of Allah!’
He said: ‘As for me, I do feel like it; this is the fourth morning in which I did not taste any food. And if I
wish, I can pray to my Lord to grant me the like of the kingdoms of Chosroes and the Caesar. What will you
do then, O Ibn ‘Umar, when you live among people who store their provision for a year and when certainty
is weakened?’ By Allah, we did not leave [our place] until this verse was revealed (And how many an animal
there is that beareth not its own provision! Allah provideth for it and for you. He is the Hearer, the Knower)”.

[29:8]. (…and follow the path of him who
repenteth unto Me…)