[31:14] and the verse
in Surah al-Ahqaf

[31:6]
(And of mankind is he who payeth for mere pastime of discourse…)

[31:6]. Al-Kalbi and Muqatil said: “This
verse was revealed about al-Nadr ibn al-Harith. He used to travel to Persia for trade. He bought the events
of non-Arabs and related them to the Quraysh, saying: ‘Muhammad relates to you the events of ‘Ad and 
126
Thamud, and I relate to you the events of Rustum and Isfindiyar and the Chosroes’. They found his tales
more entertaining and they shunned listening to the Qur’an, and so this verse was revealed”. Mujahid said:
“This verse was revealed about the buying of slave-girls and songstresses”. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Ibrahim al-Muqri’ informed us> Muhammad ibn al-Fadl ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Khuzaymah> his
grandfather> ‘Ali ibn Hujr> Mishma‘ill ibn Milhan al-Ta’i> Muttarih ibn Yazid> ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Zahr> ‘Ali ibn
Yazid> al-Qasim> Abu Umamah who reported that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, said: “It is forbidden to teach songstresses [to sing] or to sell songstresses, and the price gotten from
selling them is unlawful. It is about the like of this that this verse was revealed (And of mankind is he who
payeth for mere pastime of discourse, that he may mislead from Allah’s way without knowledge…) up to the
end of the verse. No man raises his voice to sing except that Allah, exalted is He, sends him two devils, one
on each side, who will keep banging with their feet until it is him who keeps quiet”. Thuwayr ibn Abi
Fakhitah reported from his father that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “This verse was revealed about a man who bought a
slave-girl who sang to him day and night”.

[31:15]
(But if they strive with thee to make thee ascribe unto Me as partner…)

[31:15]. This was revealed about
Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas as mentioned before in Surah al-‘Ankabut

[31:15]. This verse was revealed about Abu Bakr, may Allah be well pleased with him.
‘Ata’ reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “This refers to Abu Bakr, may Allah be well pleased with him. When the
latter embraced Islam, ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn ‘Awf, Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas, Sa‘id ibn Zayd, ‘Uthman, Talhah and
al-Zubayr went to him and said: ‘Did you believe in Muhammad and adopt his message?’ And when he said
that he did they all went to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and declared their
faith in him and believed in his message. And so, Allah, exalted is He, addressing Sa‘d, said (…and follow the
path of him who repenteth unto Me…), i.e. Abu Bakr, may Allah be well pleased with him”.

[31:27]
(And if all the trees in the earth were pens…)

[31:27]. The commentators of the Qur’an said: “The Jews
asked the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, about the spirit, and so Allah, exalted is
He, revealed (They will ask thee concerning the Spirit. Say: the Spirit is by command of my Lord, and of
knowledge ye have been vouchsafed but little)

[31:34]
Lo! Allah! With Him is knowledge of the Hour…)

[31:34]. This verse was revealed about al-Harith ibn ‘Amr
ibn Harithah ibn Muharib ibn Hafsah, from the desert, who asked the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace, about the Hour and its exact timing. He also asked: ‘Our land has dried up, when is it going to rain?
And I left my wife pregnant, when is she going to give birth? And I know in which land I was born, but in
which land am I going to die?’ And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse. Abu ‘Uthman Sa‘id ibn
Muhammad al-Mu’adhdhin informed us> Muhammad ibn Hamdun ibn al-Fadl> Ahmad ibn al-Hasan alHafiz> Hamdan al-Sulami> al-Nadr ibn Muhammad> ‘Ikrimah> Iyas ibn Salamah who said: “My father
related to me that he was with the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, when a man came toward
him leading a mare which was followed by her foal. The man asked: ‘Who are you?’ He said: ‘I am the
Prophet of Allah’. ‘And who is the Prophet of Allah?’ the man asked. The Prophet said: ‘The Messenger of
Allah’. The man asked: ‘When is the Hour going to take place?’ The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and
give him peace, said: ‘This is of the unseen, and none knows the unseen except Allah’. The man asked:
‘When is it going to rain?’ The Prophet said: ‘This is of the unseen, and none knows the unseen except 
127
Allah’. The man asked: ‘What is in the womb of this mare of mine?’ The prophet said: ‘This is of the unseen,
and none knows the unseen except Allah’. The man then said: ‘Show me your sword’. The Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, gave him his sword. The man waved the sword and then returned it to the
Prophet. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said to him at that point: ‘Indeed, you would not
have been able to carry out what you intended!’ The man had said before coming: ‘I am going to ask him
about these things and then behead him’ ”. Abu ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi Ishaq> Abu ‘Amr Muhammad ibn Ja‘far
ibn Matar> Muhammad ibn ‘Uthman ibn Suwayd> Abu Hudhayfah> Sufyan al-Thawri> ‘Abd Allah ibn Dinar>
Ibn ‘Umar who related that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: “The keys of
the unseen are five and none knows them except Allah, exalted is He: none knows the timing of the Hour
except Allah; none knows what is hidden in wombs except Allah; none knows what is stored in the morrow
except Allah; no soul knows in which land it will die, only Allah knows this; and none knows when it will rain
except Allah”. This was narrated by Bukhari from Muhammad ibn Yusuf from Sufyan.