[33:10]”. Said 'Ata': “When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
and his Companions migrated to Medina, the Muslims lived under extreme duress because they migrated
without their wealth and had left their houses and fortunes in the hands of the idolaters, preferring instead
the good pleasure of Allah and His Messenger. Additionally, the Jews manifested their enmity to the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and a number of wealthy people were hypocrites in
secret. In order to set their minds at rest, Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Or think ye that ye will enter
paradise…)”.

[33:12], and Allah, exalted is He, revealed about this incident: (Say: O Allah! Owner of
Sovereignty!)”. 
32

[33:53]. I also said to the wives
of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace: ‘You had better take heed or Allah, glorious is He, will
give the Prophet instead of you wives who are better than you’. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (It may
happen that his Lord, if he divorce you, will give him in your stead wives better than you)

[33:1]
(O Prophet! Keep thy duty to Allah and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites…)

[33:1]. This verse
was revealed about Abu Sufyan, ‘Ikrimah ibn Abi Jahl and Abu’l-A‘war al-Sulami [‘Amr ibn Sufyan]. After the
fighting at Uhud, they travelled to Medina and stayed as guests at ‘Abd Allah ibn Ubayy’s. The Prophet, Allah 
128
bless him and give him peace, had allowed them to come to speak with him with his assurance of
protection. They went to see the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, accompanied by ‘Abd Allah
ibn Sa‘d ibn Abi Sarh and Tu‘mah ibn Ubayriq. They said to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace,
who had ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab with him: “Reject the mention of our idols al-Lat, al-‘Uzza and Manat and say
that they have benefit and the power of intercession for those who worship them, and we will leave you
alone with your Lord!” Their words hurt the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace. ‘Umar ibn alKhattab, may Allah be well pleased with him, said: “Let me kill them, O Messenger of Allah!” The Prophet
said: “I have given them my assurance of protection”, upon which ‘Umar said to them: “Leave with Allah’s
curse and wrath upon you”. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, commanded ‘Umar
to drive them out of Medina, and then Allah, glorious and majestic is He, revealed this verse.

[33:4]
(Allah hath not assigned unto any man two hearts within his body…)

[33:4]. This verse was revealed about
Jamil ibn Ma'mar al-Fihri who was a sensible man who memorised whatever he heard. The Quraysh said:
“He could not have memorised all these things unless he had two hearts”. Labib used to say: “I have two
hearts and my perception by means of either one of them is better than the perception of Muhammad”.
When the Battle of Badr took place and the idolaters were defeated, Abu Sufyan met Jamil ibn Ma'mar, who
had accompanied the idolaters. Jamil was wearing one shoe and holding the other shoe in his hand. Abu
Sufyan asked him: “What is the state of people?” He said: “They were defeated”. Abu Sufyan asked him
again: “But why are you wearing one shoe and holding the other in your hand?” Jamil said: “I thought I was
wearing both shoes”. On that day, people knew that he would not have forgotten his shoe in his hand if he
really had two hearts. (hath He made those whom ye claim (to be your sons) your sons)

[33:4]. This verse
was revealed about Zayd ibn Harithah. He was a slave of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, but he freed him and adopted him before he was sent as a Prophet. When the Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, married Zaynab bint Jahsh, who was the divorcee of Zayd ibn Harithah, the
Jews and hypocrites said: “Muhammad has married the wife of his son while forbidding people from doing
the same!” And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse. Sa'id ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Nu'aym alIshkabi informed us> al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn Makhlid> Muhammad ibn Ishaq alThaqafi> Qutaybah ibn Sa'id> Ya'qub ibn 'Abd al-Rahman> Musa ibn 'Uqbah> Salim> 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar
who used to say: “We did not use to call Zayd ibn Harithah with any other name except Zayd ibn
Muhammad until the Qur'an revealed (Proclaim their real parentage. That will be more equitable in the sight
of Allah)

[33:5]”. This was narrated by Bukhari> Mu'alla ibn Asad> 'Abd al-'Aziz ibn al-Mukhtar> Musa ibn
'Uqbah.

[33:23]
(Of the believers are men who are true to that which they covenanted with Allah…)

[33:23]. Abu
Muhammad Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim informed us> 'Abd Allah ibn Humayd> Makki ibn 'Abdan>
'Abd Allah ibn Hashim> Bahz ibn Asad> Sulayman ibn al-Mughirah> Thabit> Anas who said: “My uncle Anas
ibn al-Nadr - after whom I was named Anas - failed to take part in the Battle of Badr. When he returned, he
was extremely pained that he did not participate in Badr. He said: 'I was absent from the first battle fought
by the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. By Allah, if Allah, glorified and exalted is He,
enables me to take part in any future fighting, He will see what I will do!' At the Battle of Uhud, when the
Muslims were exposed, he said: 'O Allah, I exonerate myself from that which these idolaters have brought
and seek Your pardon from what these - i.e. the Muslims - have done'. He then proceeded with the sword in
his hand. On the way, he met Sa'd ibn Mu'adh and said to him: 'O Sa'd, by Him in Whose Hand is my soul, I
can smell the scent of the Garden by Uhud'. He fought the idolaters until he was killed. We found him
among the dead. He had suffered eighty something wounds, ranging from a blow with the sword, a stab
with spear to a hit by a arrow. They mutilated him to the extent that we did not recognise him. It was his
sister who identified him by his finger. This verse was then revealed (Of the believers are men who are true
to that which they covenanted with Allah…). We used to say: 'This verse was revealed about him and his
fellow Muslims [who died fighting]' ”. Narrated by Muslim from Muhammad ibn Hatim from Bahz ibn Asad.
Sa'id ibn Ahmad ibn Ja'far al-Mu'adhdhin informed us> Abu 'Ali ibn Abi Bakr al-Faqih> Ibrahim ibn 'Abd Allah
al-Zabibi> Bundar> Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allah al-Ansari> his father> Thumamah> Anas ibn Malik who said:
“This verse was revealed about Anas ibn al-Nadr (Of the believers are men who are true to that which they 
129
covenanted with Allah)”. This was narrated by Bukhari from Bundar. (Some of them have paid their vow by
death (in battle), and some of them still are waiting…)

[33:23]. This verse was revealed about Talhah ibn
'Ubayd Allah. He remained firm around the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, at the
Battle of Uhud until his hand was hurt. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said at
that point: “O Allah, decree the Garden for Talhah!” Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allah al-Tamimi
informed us> Abu'l-Shaykh al-Hafiz> Ahmad ibn Ja'far ibn Nasr al-Razi> al-'Abbas ibn Isma'il al-Raqqi>
Isma'il ibn Yahya al-Baghdadi> Abu Sinan> al-Dahhak> al-Nizal ibn Sabrah> 'Ali who said about Talhah:
“That is a man about whom a verse from the Book of Allah, exalted is He, has been revealed (Some of them
have paid their vow by death (in battle), and some of them still are waiting). Talhah is of those who have
already paid their vows, he will face no reckoning regarding that which he will do in the future”. 'Abd alRahman ibn Hamdan informed us> Ahmad ibn Ja'far ibn Malik> 'Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal> his
father> Waki'> Talhah ibn Yahya who reported that one day the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace, passed by Talhah and said: “This one is of those who have already paid their vows”.

[33:33]
(Allah’s wish is but to remove uncleanness far from you, O Folk of the Household…)

[33:33]. Abu Bakr alHarithi informed us> Abu Muhammad ibn Hayyan> Ahmad ibn ‘Amr ibn Abi ‘Asim> Abu’l-Rabi‘ al-Zahrani>
‘Ammar ibn Muhammad> al-Thawri> Sufyan> Abu’l-Jahhaf> ‘Atiyyah> Abu Sa‘id [al-Khudri] who said
regarding the verse (Allah’s wish is but to remove uncleanness far from you, O Folk of the Household…): “It
was revealed about five people: the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn, may Allah be well pleased with all of them”. Abu Sa‘id al-Nasruyiyy informed us> Ahmad ibn
Ja‘far al-Qati‘i> ‘Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal> his father> Ibn Numayr> ‘Abd al-Malik> ‘Ata’ ibn Abi
Rabah who said: “Some of those who heard Umm Salamah related to me that she mentioned that the
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, was in her house when Fatimah, may Allah be well pleased
with her, came with a pot containing a meat dish. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said to
her: ‘Call for me your husband and your sons!’ ‘Ali, al-Hasan and al-Husayn came in and sat down to eat
from the meat dish while the Prophet was sitting on his place of sleep and he had under him a garment
made in Khaybar. Umm Salamah said: ‘I was praying in my room when Allah, exalted is He, revealed this
verse (Allah’s wish is but to remove uncleanness far from you, O Folk of the Household…). He grabbed the
extension of the garment and covered them with it. Then, he got his hands out, raised them toward heaven
and said: ‘O Allah, these are the folk of my household and my closest family members, please remove
uncleanness from them and cleanse them with a thorough cleansing’. I put my head inside and said: ‘And I
am with you, O Messenger of Allah!’ And he answered: ‘You will gain good! You will gain good!’ ’ ” Abu’lQasim ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Muhammad al-Sarraj informed us> Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub> al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn
‘Affan> Abu Yahya al-Hamani> Salih ibn Musa al-Qurashi> Khusayf> Sa‘id ibn Jubayr> Ibn ‘Abbas who said:
“This verse was revealed about the wives of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace (Allah’s wish is
but to remove uncleanness far from you, O Folk of the Household, and cleanse you with a thorough
cleansing)”. ‘Aqil ibn Muhammad al-Jurjani informed us (through a verbal authorisation)> al-Mu‘afa ibn
Zakariyya al-Qadi> Muhammad ibn Jarir> Ibn Humayd> Yahya ibn Wadih> al-Asbagh> ‘Alqamah> ‘Ikrimah
who said, regarding the words of Allah, exalted is He (Allah’s wish is but to remove uncleanness far from
you, O Folk of the Household): “This verse was not revealed about whom you think it was revealed. Rather,
it is about the wives of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace”. ‘Ikrimah used to proclaim this in
the marketplace.

[33:35]
(Lo! men who surrender unto Allah, and women who surrender…)

[33:35]. Muqatil ibn Hayyan said: “I was
informed that when Asma' bint 'Umays returned with her husband, Ja'far ibn Abi Talib, from Abyssinia. She
went to the wives of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: 'Has anything from the
Qur'an been revealed about us [women]?' They answered that nothing was revealed about them, and so she
went to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: 'O Messenger of Allah,
women are disappointed and at a loss!' He said: 'How is that?' She said: 'They are not mentioned [in the
Qur'an] in good as the men are'. [As a response,] Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Lo! men who surrender
unto Allah, and women who surrender…) up to the end of the verse”. Qatadah said: “When Allah, exalted is
He, mentioned the wives of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, [in the Qur'an,] some Muslim 
130
women went to visit them and said: 'You were mentioned and we were not. Had there been any good in us,
we would have been mentioned!' And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Lo! men who surrender unto Allah,
and women who surrender)”.

[33:43]
(He it is Who blesseth you, and His angels…)

[33:43]. Mujahid said: “When the verse (Lo! Allah and His
angels shower blessings on the Prophet)

[33:56], Abu Bakr said: ‘Allah, exalted is He, has not given you any
good except that made us partake of it’. Then, this verse (Lo! Allah and His angels shower blessings on the
Prophet) was revealed”.

[33:51]
(Thou canst defer whom thou wilt of them…)

[33:51]. The commentators of the Qur’an said: “This verse
was revealed when some of the wives of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, felt jealous [of
other co-wives] so much so that they harmed him and asked for increase in their maintenance. The
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, did not sleep with them in the same bed for a
month until the verse of choice

[33:29] was revealed. Allah, exalted is He, commanded him to ask them to
choose between this worldly life and the Afterlife. He was commanded to divorce those who chose this
worldly life and keep whoever among them chose Allah, glorified is He, and His Messenger as mothers of the
believers who will never marry after him. He was also given permission to receive anyone of them he
wanted to receive and defer anyone he wanted to defer; they had to be content whether or not he
apportioned something for them, and regardless of whether or not he prefers some over the others with
regard to the apportioning of provision and the time spent with them. It was all up to him to do as he
wished. All of them accepted these terms. However, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, gave an equal part of maintenance to all his wives, even though Allah, exalted is He, had granted
him wide compass [in his dealings with them]”. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Muzakki informed
us> ‘Abd al-Malik ibn al-Hasan ibn Yusuf al-Saqati> Ahmad ibn Yahya al-Halwani> Yahya ibn Ma‘in> ‘Abbad
ibn ‘Abbad> ‘Asim al-Ahwal> Mu‘adhah> ‘A’ishah who said: “After the verse (Thou canst defer whom thou
wilt of them…) was revealed, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, used to seek
permission from us [to go to another of his wives] when it was the turn of one of us [to spend time with
him]”. Mu‘adhah asked her: “What did you use to say?” I used to say: “If this is my turn, I would not prefer
anyone else to have you instead of me!” This was narrated by Bukhari> Hibban ibn Musa> Ibn al-Mubarak
and also by Muslim> Shurayh ibn Yunus> ‘Abbad; and both ‘Abbad and Ibn al-Mubarak related it from
‘Asim. Some commentators said: “When the verse of choice

[33:29] was revealed, the wives of the Prophet
were scared of being divorced. They said to him: ‘O Prophet of Allah, apportion for us whatever you like of
your wealth and person; just leave us as we are’. And so this verse was revealed”. ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn
‘Abdan informed us> Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Nu‘aym> Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub alAkhram> Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab> Muhadir ibn al-Muwaddi‘> Hisham ibn ‘Urwah> his father>
‘A’ishah who used to say to the wives of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace: “Does a woman
not feel ashamed of offering herself?” And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse (Thou canst defer
whom thou wilt of them and receive unto thee whom thou wilt). ‘A’ishah then said: “I see that your Lord
hastens for you what you desire”. This is narrated by Bukhari from Zakariyya ibn Yahya and also by Muslim
from Abu Kurayb; both Zakariyya ibn Yahya and Abu Kurayb related it from Abu Usamah who related it from
Hisham.

[33:53]
(O Ye who believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet…)

[33:53]. Most of the commentators of the
Qur’an said: “When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, married Zaynab bint Jahsh,
he organised a wedding feast in which was offered dates and a mush of wheat and he slaughtered a sheep.
Anas said: ‘My mother Umm Sulaym sent him a container made of stone. The Prophet, Allah bless him and
give him peace, then commanded me to invite his Companions to eat and so I did. Groups of people came,
ate and then left. I said: ‘O Prophet of Allah, I have invited everybody and there is no one else to invite’. He
said: ‘Take away your food’. They took away the food and people left, except for three people who stayed in
the room talking among themselves. They stayed so long that they annoyed the Messenger of Allah, Allah 
131
bless him and give him peace, who was extremely bashful [such that he could not ask them to leave]. And
so this verse was revealed, and the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, drew a veil
between him and me’ ”. Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Faqih informed us> Abu Umar Muhammad ibn
Ahmad al-Hiri> ‘Imran ibn Musa ibn Mujashi‘> ‘Abd al-A‘la ibn Hammad al-Nursi> al-Mu‘tamir ibn
Sulayman> his father> Abu Majlaz> Anas ibn Malik who said: “When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, married Zaynab ibn Jahsh, he invited people to a wedding ceremony. People ate and
then remained in their seats talking to each other. The Prophet made as if he was preparing himself to leave
but people did not get the hint. He then left the room and people left with him, except for three people who
remained sitting. When the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, returned and found them still
sitting, he went out again. When they saw this, the three men left. I went and informed the Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, that they had left. He returned and entered his room. I wanted to
enter with him but he drew the curtain between him and me. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed (O Ye who
believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet for a meal without waiting for the proper time…) up to His
words (Lo! that in Allah’s sight would be an enormity)”. This was narrated by Bukhari from Muhammad ibn
‘Abd Allah al-Riqashi and also by Muslim from Yahya ibn Habib al-Harithi; both al-Riqashi and al-Harithi
related it from al-Mu‘tamir. Isma‘il ibn Ibrahim al-Wa‘iz informed us> Abu ‘Amr ibn Nujayd> Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan ibn al-Khalil> Hisham ibn ‘Ammar> al-Khalil ibn Musa> ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Awn> ‘Amr ibn Shu‘ayb>
Anas ibn Malik who said: “I was with the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, when he
passed by one of his rooms and saw people there sitting and talking. He then returned and entered the
room and drew the curtain in my face. I went to Abu Talhah and related to him what had happened. He
said: ‘If what you say is true, Allah, exalted is He, will reveal some Qur’an about it’. Allah, exalted is He, then
revealed (O Ye who believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet for a meal without waiting for the proper
time)”. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Hiri informed us> Hajib ibn Ahmad> ‘Abd al-Rahim ibn Munib> Yazid ibn
Harun> Humayd> Anas who said: “‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, may Allah be well pleased with him, said: ‘I said:
‘O Messenger of Allah, the righteous and the corrupt enter in on you, why do you not command the mothers
of the believers to be out of the sight of men’, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed the verse of segregation
(Ayat al-Hijab)’ ”. This was narrated by Bukhari> Musaddid> Yahya ibn Abi Za’idah> Humayd. Abu Hakim alJurjani informed us through verbal authorisation> Abu’l-Faraj al-Qadi> Muhammad ibn Jarir> Ya‘qub ibn
Ibrahim> Hushaym> Layth> Mujahid who related that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, was once eating with his Companions when the hand of one of them touched the hand of ‘A’ishah
who was with them. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, was upset because of this, and the
verse of segregation was revealed. (… nor that ye should marry his wives after him…)

[33:53]. ‘Ata’ related
that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “One of the nobles of Quraysh said: ‘I would marry ‘A’ishah if the Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, were to die’, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.

[33:56]
(Lo! Allah and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet…)

[33:56]. Abu Sa'id informed us> Ibn Abi 'Amr
al-Naysaburi> al-Hasan ibn Ahmad al-Makhladi> al-Mu'ammil ibn al-Hasan ibn 'Isa> Muhammad ibn Yahya>
Abu Hudhayfah> Sufyan> al-Zubayr ibn 'Adiyy> 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi Layla> Ka'b ibn 'Ujrah who said: “It
was said to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace: 'We know how to salute you, but how do we
invoke blessings on you?' And so this verse was revealed (Lo! Allah and His angels shower blessings on the
Prophet. O ye who believe! Ask blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation)”. 'Abd al-Rahman
ibn Hamdan al-'Adl informed us> Abu'l-'Abbas Ahmad ibn 'Isa al-Washsha'> Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Suli>
al-Riyashi> al-Asma'i who said: “I heard al-Mahdi say from the pulpit of [the grand mosque of] al-Basrah:
'Allah has commanded you with something that He Himself has started first when He said (Lo! Allah and His
angels shower blessings on the Prophet. O ye who believe! Ask blessings on him and salute him with a
worthy salutation). Through this, Allah has preferred the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, over
all other messengers and singled you out from all other communities. Do, therefore, meet Allah's bounty
with gratitude' ”. I heard master Abu 'Uthman al-Hafiz say that he heard Imam Sahl ibn Muhammad ibn
Sulayman say: “The honour that Allah, exalted is He, bestowed upon our Prophet, Allah bless him and give
him peace, by His saying (Lo! Allah and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet) is more far-reaching
and more complete than the honour bestowed upon Adam, peace be upon him, when the angels were
ordered to prostrate to him. This is because it is not conceivable that Allah be with the angels upon the
bestowal of that honour. However, Allah, exalted is He, has informed that He Himself showers blessings on
the Prophet, and then He informed that the angels do shower blessings upon him. Therefore, an honour 
132
which ensues from Him is much far-reaching than an honour which ensues from the angels only and which
is inconceivable that Allah be with them upon its bestowal”. What Sahl has said is taken from the saying of
al-Mahdi. He might have come across it, adopted some of it and explained it further. He also compared it
with the honour bestowed upon Adam and showed that it is more far-reaching and complete than it. It is
also mentioned in the rigorously authenticated collections of prophetic sayings the following: Abu Bakr ibn
Ibrahim al-Farisi informed us> Muhammad ibn 'Isa ibn 'Amrawayh> Ibrahim ibn Sufyan> Muslim> Qutaybah
and 'Ali ibn Hajar> Isma'il ibn Ja'far> al-'Ala'> his father> Abu Hurayrah who reported that the Messenger
of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: “Whoever invokes blessings on me once, Allah will invoke
blessings upon him ten times”.

[33:58]
(And those who malign believing men and believing women undeservedly…)

[33:58]. 'Ata' reported that Ibn
'Abbas said: “Once, 'Umar ibn al-Khattab, may Allah be well pleased with him, saw a girl from the Helpers
with her beauty uncovered. He disliked seeing her beauty and hit her. She complained to her family about
him and, as a result, they went out to him in order to hurt him. Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse
about this incident”. Muqatil said: “This verse was revealed about 'Ali ibn Abi Talib who used to be harmed
and maligned by a group of hypocrites”. Al-Dahhak and al-Suddi said: “This verse was revealed about those
adulterers who used to roam the streets of Medina and follow the women who come out at night to relieve
themselves. When they saw a woman, they approached her and winked at her. If the woman did not say
anything, they followed her; but if she rebuked them, they left her alone. Actually, these adulterers were
only after slave girls. But at that time, freewomen were not distinguishable from slave-girls. All women used
to go out wearing a chemise and a headscarf. The women complained to their husbands who mentioned the
matter to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed
this verse”. The proof for the soundness of the above opinion is the saying of Allah, exalted is He (O
Prophet! Tell thy wives and thy daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks close round
them…)

[33:59]. Sa'id ibn Muhammad al-Mu'adhdhin informed us> Abu 'Ali al-Faqih> Ahmad ibn al-Husayn
ibn al-Junayd> Ziyad ibn Ayyub> Hushaym> Husayn> Abu Malik who said: “The believing women were in
the habit of going out at night to relieve themselves, but the hypocrites used to approach and malign them.
This verse was revealed about this”. Said al-Suddi: “The houses of Medina used to be narrow. [For this
reason,] women used to wait until nightfall in order to go out to relieve themselves. The corrupt of Medina
also used to go out at night. Whenever they saw a woman with a cover, they said: 'This is a freewoman',
and they left her alone. But whenever they saw a woman without cover, they said: 'This is a slave', and
tempted her to commit adultery. Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse about this matter”.