[5:64]”.

[5:2]
(O ye who believe! Profane not Allah’s monuments…)

[5:2]. Said Ibn ‘Abbas: “This was revealed about alHutam whose full name is Sharih ibn Dubay‘ah al-Kindi. This man went from al-Yamamah to Medina to see
the Prophet, Allah bless him and his Household and give him peace. When he arrived at Medina, he went in
alone to speak with the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace. He said: ‘What do you call people for?’
he said: ‘To testify that there is no god but Allah, to establish the prayer and to pay the poor due’. The man
said: ‘This is good, except that I have chiefs without whose consultation I cannot take any decision. It may
be that I embrace Islam and bring them with me’. And then he left. Before this, the Prophet, Allah bless him
and give him peace, had said to his Companions: ‘A man will enter in on you and will speak with the tongue
of the devil’. When the man left, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: ‘He has
come in with a disbeliever’s countenance and retreated with the steps of a treacherous one. The man is no
Muslim’. The man passed by the camels of Medina which graze freely and led them away with him. People
went after him but could not find him. When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace
went to perform the pilgrimage in the year of Hudaybiyyah, he heard the chanting “Labbayk” from the
pilgrims of al-Yamamah. He said to his Companions: ‘Here is al-Hutam and his followers!’ This man had put
garlands on the camels he stole from Medina and offered them to the Ka‘bah. When the Muslims wanted to
get him, Allah, exalted is He, revealed (O ye who believe! Profane not Allah’s monuments…), by monuments
here is meant that which is offered for Allah, even if those who offer it profess a religion other than Islam”.
Said Zayd ibn Aslam: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and his Household and give him peace, and 
66
his Companions were in Hudaybiyyah when the idolaters barred them from entering the Sacred House. The
Muslims were devastated. Then, a group of idolaters passed by them, they were in their way to perform the
lesser pilgrimage. Some of the Companions of the Messenger, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: ‘Let
us bar these people as their friends have barred us. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (O ye who believe!
Profane not Allah’s monuments nor the Sacred Month nor the offerings nor the garlands, nor those repairing
to the Sacred House)’, i.e. do not transgress against these pilgrims because their friends have barred you
from entering the Sacred House”.

[5:3]
(This day have I perfected your religion for you…)

[5:3]. This verse was revealed on Friday, on the Day of
‘Arafah, at the farewell pilgrimage, after ‘Asr prayer in the tenth year of the Hijrah while the Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, was present in ‘Arafat on the back of his camel al-‘Adba’. ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn
Hamdan al-‘Adl informed us> Ahmad ibn Ja‘far al-Qati‘i> ‘Abd Allah ibn Ahmad> his father> Ja‘far ibn
‘Awn> Abu ‘Umays> Qays ibn Muslim> Tariq ibn Shihab who said: “A Jewish man went to ‘Umar ibn alKhattab, may Allah be well pleased with him, and said: ‘O leader of the believers, you recite one verse in
your Scripture which, if it had been revealed to us, we would have taken the day in which it was revealed as
a day of celebration’. ‘Which verse is this?’ asked ‘Umar. He said: ‘It is (This day have I perfected your
religion for you and completed My favour unto you…)’. ‘Umar said: ‘By Allah, I know the day in which it was
revealed to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and the hour in which it was
revealed to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and his family and give him peace. It was revealed on
Friday, in the afternoon of the day of ‘Arafah’ ”. This was narrated by Bukhari from al-Hasan ibn Sabah and
also by Muslim from ‘Abd ibn Humayd, and Ibn Sabah and Ibn Humayd related it from Ja‘far ibn ‘Awn. AlHakim Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Shadhyakhi informed us> Zahir ibn Ahmad> al-Husayn ibn Nuhammad ibn
Mus‘ab> Yahya ibn Hakim> Abu Qutaybah> Hammad> ‘Ammar ibn Abi ‘Ammar: “Ibn ‘Abbas recited this
verse in the presence of a Jewish man, and the latter said: ‘If this verse was revealed to us, we would have
taken the day in which it was revealed as a celebration day’. Ibn ‘Abbas said: ‘Well, it was revealed in two
days of celebration which coincided with each other: it was a Friday which coincided with the day of ‘Arafah’
”.

[5:4]
(They ask thee (O Muhammad) what is made lawful for them…)

[5:4]. Abu Bakr al-Harithi informed us>
Abu’l-Shaykh al-Hafiz> Abu Yahya> Sahl ibn ‘Uthman> Yahya ibn Abi Za’idah> Musa ibn ‘Ubayda> Aban ibn
Salih> al-Qa‘qa’ ibn Hakim> Salma Umm Rafi‘> Abu Rafi‘ who said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, commanded me to kill dogs. But people said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, what is made
lawful for us from this community [of dogs] which we are commanded to kill?’ And so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed (They ask thee (O Muhammad) what is made lawful for them. Say: (all) good things are made
lawful for you. And those beasts and birds of prey)”. This was narrated by al-Hakim Abu ‘Abd Allah in his
Sahih> Abu Bakr ibn Balawayh> Muhammad ibn Shadhan> Mu‘alla ibn Mansur> Ibn Abi Za’idah. The
commentators of the Qur’an said in explanation of this story: “Said Abu Rafi‘: ‘Gabriel, peace be upon him,
went to see the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, but did not enter in on the Prophet even
though he was granted permission to enter. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
came out and said to him: ‘We have given you permission to enter, O Gabriel!’ He said: ‘Yes, you have, O
Messenger of Allah, except that we do not enter a house where there is a picture or a dog’. They looked
around and found that there was a puppy in one of the rooms’. Abu Rafi‘ said: ‘The Prophet, Allah bless him
and give him peace, commanded me to kill every dog in Medina. I proceeded with the execution of the
command until I reached al-‘Awali where I found a woman who kept a dog for her protection. Out of
compassion for her, I did not kill her dog. I went back to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace,
and informed him of what had happened, and he commanded me to go back and kill it. I went back and
killed it. When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, commanded the killing of dogs, a
group of people went to him and said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, What is lawful for us of this community that
we have been commanded to kill?’ The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, did not
answer, and then Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse. When this verse was revealed the Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, allowed keeping dogs which can be benefited from and warned
against keeping dogs from which no benefit is derived. He also commanded the killing of rabid dogs, 
67
rapacious dogs and dogs that hurt and harm people. Apart from these, all other dogs were exempted from
killing’ ”. Sa‘id ibn Jubayr said: “This verse was revealed about ‘Adiyy ibn Hatim and Zayd ibn al-Muhalhil
(the same Zayd al-Khayl [Zayd of the horses] whom the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, renamed Zayd al-Khayr [Zayd of goodness]), both of whom were from the tribe of Tayy. These two
men went to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: ‘O Messenger of Allah,
we are people who hunt using dogs and falcons, and the dogs of the family of Dhurayh and those of the
family of Abu Juwayriyah hunt cows, wild asses, deer and lizards, some of which we slaughter before they
are killed and some are killed before we get to slaughter them. What is lawful for us in this case since, Allah,
exalted is He, has forbidden eating the flesh of dead animals?’ And so this verse was revealed: (They ask
thee (O Muhammad) what is made lawful for them. Say: (all) good things are made lawful for you), meaning
that which has been slaughtered (And those beasts and birds of prey), meaning the game hunted by trained
predatory animals which are here hunting dogs and birds of prey”.

[5:11]
(O ye who believe! Remember Allah’s favour unto you, how a people were minded to stretch out their hands
against you…)

[5:11]. Sa‘id ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ja‘far al-Mu’adhdhin informed us> Abu ‘Ali alFaqih> Abu Lubabah Muhammad ibn al-Mahdi al-Mihani> ‘Ammar ibn al-Hasan> Salamah ibn al-Fadl>
Muhammad ibn Ishaq> ‘Amr ibn ‘Ubayd> al-Hasan al-Basri> Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari who related that a
man from Muharib by the name of Ghawrath ibn al-Harith said to his people of Banu Ghatafan and Muharib:
“Shall I kill Muhammad for you?” “Yes, but how are you going to do it?” they asked him. He said: “I will
assassinate him!” This man then proceeded to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
and found him sitting with his sword in his lap. He said: “O Muhammad, let me see this sword of yours”. He
handed the sword over to him. The man took the sword out of its scabbard, moved it about but whenever
he was on the point of striking the Prophet with it, Allah, glorious and majestic is He, restrained him. The
man then said: “O Muhammad, are you not scared of me?” “No!” answered the Prophet. The man said: “You
are not scared of me even though the sword is in my hand?” The Prophet said: “Allah will protect me from
you”. The man put the sword back in its scabbard and gave it back to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace, upon which Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Remember Allah’s favour unto you, how
a people were minded to stretch out their hands against you…). Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Tha‘labi informed us>
‘Abd Allah ibn Hamid> Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan> Muhammad ibn Yahya> ‘Abd al-Razzaq>
Ma‘mar> al-Zuhri> Abu Salamah> Jabir who reported that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, stopped by at a certain location and so people spread about to seek shade under the trees. The
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, hang his weapon on a tree and sat down to rest. A Bedouin
came along, got hold of the sword belonging to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
turned to him and said: “Who will save you from me now?” The Prophet said: “Allah!” The Bedouin repeated
the same question two or three times, and the answer of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace,
was always the same: “Allah!” The Bedouin then put the sword back in its scabbard. The Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, called his Companions and informed them of what happened while the
Bedouin, who went unpunished, was still sitting next to him. Mujahid, al-Kalbi and ‘Ikrimah said: “One of the
Companions of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, killed two men from Banu Salim at a period
when the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, had a truce with Banu Salim. The next-of-kin of the
two men went to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, to ask for blood money. The prophet,
Allah bless him and give him peace, took Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, ‘Ali, Talhah and ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn
‘Awf and went to Ka‘b al-Ashraf, to seek help from Banu’l-Nadir to pay the blood money. They said: ‘Indeed
Abu’l-Qasim, it is high time for you to come and ask us to help you. Sit down so that we feed you and fulfil
your request’. When the Prophet and his Companions sat down, they gathered close by and said to each
other: ‘Muhammad will never be as close to you as he is now; who can climb up to the top of the house,
throw a rock on him and rid us of him?’ ‘Umar ibn Jihash ibn Ka‘b said: ‘I will do it!’ He got hold of a huge
millstone intending to throw it on the Prophet, but Allah, exalted is He, prevented him from doing so. When
Gabriel informed the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, of what happened, the Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, left that house, and Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.

[5:33]
(The only reward of those who make war upon Allah and His messenger…)

[5:33]. Abu Nasr Ahmad ibn 
68
‘Ubayd Allah al-Makhladi informed us> Abu ‘Amr ibn Nujayd> Muslim> ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Hammad> Sa‘id
ibn Abi ‘Arubah> Qatadah> Anas who related that a group of people from ‘Ukal and ‘Uraynah went to see
the Messenger of Allah, Allah, bless him and give him peace. They said: “O Messenger of Allah, we were
never people of agriculture, and before we settled around Medina we used to be people who looked after
cattle”. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, ordered that they be given a flock of
camels, a shepherd and commanded them to set off with them, with a dispensation to drink their milk and
urine. When they reached the region of al-Harrah, they killed the shepherd of the Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, and took off with the camels. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and
give him peace, sent after them and when they were captured and brought to him, he cut off their hands
and feet and gouged their eyes. They were left in this state in Medina until they died. Said Qatadah: “It was
mentioned to us that this verse was revealed about them (The only reward of those who make war upon
Allah and His messenger and strive after corruption in the land…)”. Narrated by Muslim from Muhammad ibn
al-Muthanna from ‘Abd al-A‘la from Sa‘id up to the quotation of Qatadah.

[5:38]
(As for the thief, both male and female, cut off their hands…)

[5:38]. Said al-Kalbi: “This was revealed about
Tu‘mah ibn Ubayriq who stole an armour. His story has already been covered”.

[5:41-47]
(O Messenger! Let not them grieve thee who vie one with another in the race to disbelief…)

[5:41-47]. Abu
Bakr Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Hiri informed us by dictation> Abu Muhammad, the chamberlain of Ibn Ahmad
al-Tusi> Muhammad ibn Hammad al-Abiwardi> Abu Mu'awiyah> al-A'mash> 'Abd Allah ibn Murrah> al-Bara'
ibn 'Azib who said: “One day, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, passed by a
Jewish man who had just been flogged and had his face darkened with coal. He summoned the Jews and
asked them: 'Is this what your Scripture decrees as punishment for the adulterer?' 'Yes!' they replied. He
then summoned one of their doctors and asked him: 'I implore you by Allah who has sent the Torah to
Moses, is this what your Scripture decrees as punishment for the adulterer'. He said: 'No! And if you had not
implored me by Allah, I would not tell you. Our Scripture rules that the punishment of the adulterer is
stoning. But it became widespread among our notables. Initially, when one of the notables committed
adultery, we left him unpunished while we applied stoning on the communality in cases of adultery. Then we
decided to look for a punishment that was applied on both the notables and communality of people. And so
we agreed on darkening the face with coal and flogging to replace stoning'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, said: 'O Allah! I am the first to reapply your command after they had
suspended it'. And he ordered that the Jewish man be stoned. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed (O
Messenger! Let not them grieve thee who vie one with another in the race to disbelief) up to His words (If
this be given unto you, receive it…), they said: 'Go to Muhammad; if he directs you to flog the adulterer and
darken his face with coal and apply flogging, then follow him. But do not follow him if he directs you to
apply stoning on him'. Up to His words (Whoso judgeth not by that which Allah hath revealed: such are
disbelievers)

[5:44]. He said: 'This relates to the Jews'. Up to His words (Whoso judgeth not by that which
Allah hath revealed: such are wrong-doers)

[5:45]. He said: 'This relates to the Christians'. Up to His words
(Whoso judgeth not by that which Allah hath revealed: such are evil-livers)

[5:47]. He said: 'This relates to
all disbelievers'. Narrated by Muslim from Yahya ibn Yahya from Abu Mu'awiyah”. Abu 'Abd Allah ibn Abi
Ishaq informed us> Abu'l-Haytham Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ghawth al-Kindi> Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allah
ibn Sulayman al-Hadrami> Abu Bakr ibn Abi Shaybah> Abu Mu'awiyah> al-A'mash> 'Abd Allah ibn Murrah>
al-Bara' ibn 'Azib who related that the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, stoned a Jewish man
and a Jewish woman and said afterwards: “(Whoso judgeth not by that which Allah hath revealed: such are
disbelievers)

[5:44], (Whoso judgeth not by that which Allah hath revealed: such are wrong-doers)

[5:45],
(Whoso judgeth not by that which Allah hath revealed: such are evil-livers)

[5:47]. All these three verses
were revealed about the disbelievers”. This was narrated by Muslim from Abu Bakr ibn Abi Shaybah.

[5:49]
(So judge between them by that which Allah hath revealed…)

[5:49]. Said Ibn ‘Abbas: “A group of Jews
which included Ka‘b ibn Asad, ‘Abd Allah ibn Suriya and Shas ibn Qays said to each other: ‘Let us go to 
69
Muhammad lest we seduce him from his religion’. When they went to him, they said: ‘O Muhammad, you
know that we are the rabbis and nobles of the Jews, and if we were to follow you, the Jews will follow us
without objection. We will believe in you and confirm your message in exchange for a favour: we have a
dispute with some people and we want you to judge in our favour against them’. The Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, refused to do so, and Allah, exalted is He, revealed about them (… but
beware of them lest they seduce thee from some part of that which Allah hath revealed unto thee…)”.

[5:51]
(O ye who believe! Take not the Jews and the Christians for friends…)

[5:51]. Said ‘Atiyyah al-‘Awfi:
“‘Ubadah ibn al-Samit went to see the Prophet and asked him: ‘O Messenger of Allah! I have numerous
clients from amongst the Jews, who are ever ready to support me. However, I stand before Allah and His
Messenger to absolve myself from the guardianship of the Jews. And I turn, instead, to Allah and His
Messenger’. Hearing this, ‘Abd Allah ibn Ubayy said: ‘I am a man who fears the turn of events and will not
absolve myself from the guardianship of the Jews’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, then said: ‘O Abu’l-Hubab, that which you reserve to yourself of the guardianship of the Jews apart
from ‘Ubadah ibn al-Samit is all yours and none of it is his’. He said: ‘I accept’. And so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed about the two of them: (O ye who believe! Take not the Jews and the Christians for friends. They
are friends one to another) up to His saying (And thou seest those in whose heart is a disease)

[5:52], i.e.
‘Abd Allah ibn Ubayy (race toward them) for support (saying: We fear lest a change of fortune befall us)”.

[5:55]
(Your guardian can be only Allah; and His messenger and those who believe…)

[5:55]. Said Jabir ibn ‘Abd
Allah: “‘Abd Allah ibn Sallam went to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: ‘O
Messenger of Allah, some people from Banu Qurayzah and Banu’l-Nadir have deserted us and swore not to
keep our company. And we cannot keep the company of your Companions due to the distance separating
us’. He then complained about the bad treatment he received from the Jews, and so this verse was
revealed. When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, read to him, he said: ‘We
accept Allah, His Messenger and the believers as guardians’ ”. Al-Kalbi related something close to this and
added that the end of the verse was revealed about ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, for he gave his ring to a beggar while
he was bowing during prayer. Abu Bakr al-Tamimi informed us> ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Ja‘far> alHusayn ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Hurayrah> ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab> Muhammad ibn al-Aswad>
Muhammad ibn Marwan> Muhammad ibn al-Sa’ib> Abu Salih> Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “Accompanied by a
group of believers from amongst his people, ‘Abd Allah ibn Sallam came to see the Prophet, Allah bless him
and give him peace. They said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, our houses are very far and we have no assembly or
a place in which we can gather for chatting. When our people saw that we believed in Allah and His
Messenger and confirmed his call, they eschewed us and vowed never to keep our company, speak with us
or marry from or into us. This has proved too hard for us’. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace,
replied: ‘(Your guardian can be only Allah; and His messenger and those who believe)’, up to the end of the
verse. Then the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, went out to the mosque. Some people were
standing in prayer while others were bowing. He saw a beggar in the mosque and he asked him: ‘Did you
get something from anyone?’ The beggar replied: ‘Yes, I got a ring of gold’. The Prophet asked him: ‘Who
gave it to you?’ The beggar said: ‘That person who is standing in prayer’, and he pointed to ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib.
The Prophet asked him again: ‘In which position did he give it to you?’ The beggar said: ‘He gave it to me
while bowing in prayer’. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said ‘Allah is the greatest!’ and
then recited (And whoso taketh Allah and His messenger and those who believe for guardian (will know
that), lo! the party of Allah, they are the victorious)”

[5:56].

[5:57]
(O Ye who believe! Choose not for guardians such of those who received the Scripture before you, and of
the disbelievers, as make a jest and sport of your religion)

[5:57]. Said Ibn ‘Abbas: “Rifa‘ah ibn Zayd and
Suwayd ibn al-Harith were among those who displayed their faith in Islam but were hypocrites. Some
Muslim men used to show affection to them, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”. 
70

[5:58]
(And when ye call to prayer they take it for a jest and sport…)

[5:58]. Said al-Kalbi: “When the caller to
prayer, appointed by the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, called to prayer, the
Muslims stood up to perform it. Seeing this, the Jews used to comment: 'they stood up, may they never
stand up! They prayed, may they never pray! They bowed down, may they never bow down!' They used to
say this to mock the Muslims and make fun of them. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”. Said
al-Suddi: “This was revealed about a man from the helpers of Medina. Whenever he heard the caller to
prayer say, 'I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah', he would say: 'May the liar be burnt!'
One night, the servant of this man entered his house and brought some fire with him, while this man and his
family were sleeping. A spark from this fire caused the whole house to burn down with the man and his
family in it”. Other commentators said: “When the disbelievers heard the call to prayer, they resentfully
envied the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and the Muslims for it. They said: 'O
Muhammad, you have innovated something that we have never heard of amongst bygone nations. If you
claim prophethood, then you have gone against the prophets who came before you with this matter that you
have innovated. Had there been any good in this matter, the prophets and messengers before you would
have had a better right to it. So from where did you get this cry which resembles the cry of camels? What an
ugly sound and what a revolting disbelief!' And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse (And who is better
in speech than him who prayeth unto his Lord and doeth right, and saith: Lo! I am of those who surrender
(unto Him))

[5:59]
(Say: O People of the Scripture! Do ye blame us for aught else than that we believe in Allah and that which
is revealed unto us and that which was revealed aforetime, and because most of you are evil-livers?)

[5:59].
Said Ibn ‘Abbas: “A group of Jews went to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and
asked him about the messengers he believed in. He replied: ‘I believe (… in Allah and that which is revealed
unto us and that which was revealed unto Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes, and
that which Moses and Jesus received, and that which the Prophets received from their Lord. We make no
distinction between any of them, and unto Him we have surrendered)

[5:67]
O Messenger! Make known that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy Lord…)

[5:67]. Said al-Hasan:
“The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: ‘When Allah, exalted is He, sent me as His message,
I felt oppressed by it, for I knew that some people will give me the lie’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace, was apprehensive of the Quraysh, Jews and Christians, and so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed this verse”. Abu Sa‘id Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Saffar informed us> al-Hasan ibn Ahmad al-Makhladi>
Muhammad ibn Hamdun ibn Khalid> Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Halwani> al-Hasan ibn Hammad Sijjadah>
‘Ali ibn ‘Abis> al-A‘mash> Abu’l-Hajjab> ‘Atiyyah> Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri who said: “This verse (O Messenger!
Make known that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy Lord…) was revealed on the day of ‘Ghadir
Khumm’ about ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, may Allah be well pleased with him”. (Allah will protect thee from mankind)

[5:67]. Said ‘A’ishah, may Allah be well pleased with her: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, stayed up one night and so I said: ‘What’s the matter, O Messenger of Allah?’ He said: ‘Is there
not any righteous man who would stand to watch over us tonight?’ Then we heard commotion caused by
arms and the Messenger of Allah asked: ‘Who’s there?’ ‘It is Sa‘d and Hudhayfah, we have come to keep
watch over you’, came the response. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, went to
sleep, and he slept so deep that I heard his snoring; this verse was then revealed. The Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, then popped his head out of the collar of his garment and said: ‘O
people, you can leave, for Allah has protected me’ ”. Isma‘il ibn Ibrahim al-Wa‘iz informed us> Isma‘il ibn
Nujayd> Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Khalil> Muhammad ibn al-‘Ala’> al-Himmani> al-Nadr> ‘Ikrimah> 
71
Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, used to be guarded. Abu
Talib used to send every day men from the Banu Hashim to guard him until this verse was revealed (O
Messenger! Make known that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy Lord) up to His words (Allah will
protect thee from mankind). And so when his uncle wanted to send with him people to protect him, he said:
‘O uncle! Indeed Allah has protected me from the jinn and humans’ ”.

[5:82-86]
(Thou wilt find the most vehement of mankind in hostility to those who believe (to be) the Jews) up to His
words (But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, they are owners of hell-fire)

[5:82-86]. These
verses were revealed about the Negus and his followers. Said Ibn ‘Abbas: “When he was in Mecca, the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, used to fear the idolaters’ persecution of his
Companions. He therefore sent Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib and ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud, at the head of a group of his
Companions, to the Negus. He said: ‘The Negus is a righteous man; he is not an oppressor and none is
oppressed in his dominion. So head toward him and remain there until Allah creates relief for the Muslims’.
When they went to him, the Negus honoured them and then asked them: ‘Do you memorise anything of
that which was revealed to you?’ They answered in the affirmative and then recited to him [some Qur’an,]
with monks and priests surrounding him. Whenever they read a verse, the tears rolled down their cheeks
due to the truth which they recognized. Allah, exalted is He, says: (That is because there are among them
priests and monks, and because they are not proud)”. Al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Farisi informed us>
Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn Hamdun ibn al-Fadl> Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan> Muhammad ibn
Yahya> Abu Salih, the scribe of al-Layth> al-Layth> Yunus> Ibn Shihab> Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyab and ‘Urwah
ibn al-Zubayr as well as others who said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, sent
‘Amr ibn Umayyah al-Damri with a message to the Negus. The latter read the message of the Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and then called Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib and all the Emigrants with him
and he also invited priests and monks to the assembly. He ordered Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib to recite to them from
the Qur’an, and he read Surah Maryam, peace be upon her. They believed in the Qur’an and tears flowed
from their eyes. It is about them that Allah, exalted is He, revealed (And thou wilt find the nearest of them
in affection to those who believe (to be) those who say: Lo! We are Christians) up to His words (Inscribe us
as among the witnesses)”. Other commentators said: “Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib and his companions came from
Abyssinia accompanied by a delegation from the Negus to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace. The delegation included seventy men, all wearing wool. There were sixty-two from Abyssinia and
eight from Syria: Bahirah the monk, Abrahah, Idris, Ashraf, Tammam, Quthaym, Durayd and Ayman. When
the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, recited to them Surah Yasin, they wept and
believed. They commented: ‘How similar is this to what used to be revealed to Jesus’. And so Allah, exalted
is He, revealed about them these verses”. Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-‘Adl informed us> Zahir ibn Ahmad>
Abu’l-Qasim al-Baghawi> ‘Ali ibn al-Ja‘d> Sharik> Salim> Sa‘id ibn Jubayr who, commenting on Allah’s
words (That is because there are among them priests and monks), said: “The Negus sent thirty men among
his best subjects to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. When the Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, recited to them Surah Yasin, they wept, and so this verse was
revealed”.

[5:87]
(O ye who believe! Forbid not the good things which Allah hath made lawful for you…)

[5:87]. Abu 'Uthman
ibn 'Amr al-Mu'adhdhin informed us> Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Hamdan> al-Husayn ibn Nasr ibn Sufyan>
Ishaq ibn Mansur> Abu 'Asim> 'Uthman ibn Sa'id>> 'Ikrimah> Ibn 'Abbas who related that a man went to
see the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: “I have forbidden meat on myself because
whenever I eat it I feel the urge to sleep with women”, and so the verse (O ye who believe! Forbid not the
good things which Allah hath made lawful for you) and also (Eat of that which Allah hath bestowed on you
as food lawful and good…)

[5:88]. The commentators of the Qur'an said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, sat down one day and gave an admonition to people whereby he described
the Day of Judgement to them and did not mention anything other than things which would instil fear in
them. People cried as a result of the softening of their hearts. Then ten of the prophetic Companions
gathered in the house of 'Uthman ibn Maz'un al-Jumahi. They included Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, 'Ali ibn Abi Talib,
'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, Salim, the client of Abu Hudhayfah, al-
72
Miqdad ibn al-Aswad, Salman al-Farisi and Ma'qil ibn Muqarrin. They agreed to fast the day and stand in
prayer at night, never to sleep in their beds, eat meat or fat, never to sleep with their wives or use perfume.
They also agreed to wear coarse wool garments, reject the worldly life, wander through the land and
become monks, and cut off their male organs. When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, heard of this, he gathered them and said: 'I was informed that you agreed to do such-and-such
things, is this true?' They said: 'It is, but we only meant to do good'. He said to them: 'I was not
commanded to do those things, and your own selves have a right over you. Fast and break fast, stand in
prayer at night and sleep, for I stand in prayer at night but I also sleep; I sometimes fast and sometimes do
not; I eat meat and fat. And whoever shuns my practice is not of me'. Then he went out and gave a sermon
to people in which he said: 'How come some people have forbidden sleeping with women, eating, wearing
perfume, sleeping and the desires of this world? I am not commanding you to be priests or monks, for there
is no room in my religion for abstention from eating meat and sleeping with women, nor is there room for
adoption of monasteries. The wandering of my community consists of fasting and its monasticism is Jihad.
And worship Allah and do not associate anyone with Him; perform the greater and lesser pilgrimage,
establish the prayer, pay the poor-due, and fast the month of Ramadan. Those who were before you
perished because of their extremism; they made things hard on themselves and so Allah made it hard on
them. The remains of those people are in monasteries and cloisters'. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed this
verse, upon which they said: 'O Messenger of Allah, What is to be done with the vows that we have made?'
This is because they had vowed to each other to carry out the things they agreed on. As an answer, Allah,
exalted is He, revealed (Allah will not take you to task for that which is unintentional in your oaths)

[5:90]
(O ye who believe! Strong drink and games of chance and idols and divining arrows are only an infamy of
Satan’s handiwork)

[5:90]. Abu Sa‘id ibn Abi Bakr al-Mutawwi’i informed us> Abu ‘Amr Muhammad ibn
Ahmad al-Hiri> Ahmad ibn ‘Ali al-Mawsili> Abu Khaythamah> al-Hasan ibn Musa> Zuhayr> Simak ibn
Harb> Mus‘ab ibn Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas> his father who said: “I went to a group of Emigrants and Helpers
and they said to me: ‘Let us feed you and give you wine to drink’, this was before intoxicants were made
unlawful. So I went to a field where they had a roasted camel's head and a barrel of wine. I ate and drank
with them. Then I mentioned the Emigrants and the Helpers and said: ‘The Emigrants are better than the
Helpers’. One of the man grabbed one of the jawbones [of the head we ate] and hit me with it, severing my
nose in the process. I went to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and informed him
of what had happened, and Allah, exalted is He, revealed about me the matter of intoxicants (drink and
games of chance)”. Narrated by Muslim from Abu Khaythamah. ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Hamdan al-‘Adl informed
us> Ahmad ibn Ja‘far ibn Malik> ‘Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal> his father> Khalaf ibn al-Walid> Isra’il>
Abu Ishaq> Abu Maysarah> ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab who made a supplication, saying: “O Allah, explain to us
unequivocally the matter of intoxicants”, and so the verse of Surah al-Baqarah was revealed (They question
thee about strong drink and games of chance)

[5:93]
(There shall be no sin (imputed) unto those who believe and do good works for what they may have eaten
(in the past))

[5:93]. Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Mutawwi‘i informed us> Abu ‘Amr Muhammad ibn
Ahmad al-Hiri> Abu Ya‘la> Abu’l-Rabi‘ Sulayman ibn Dawud al-‘Ataki> Hammad> Thabit> Anas who said: “I
was serving people wine in the house of Abu Talhah when intoxicants were made unlawful. Their wine was
made from unripe dates, split unripe dates and dates. We heard a crier announcing that intoxicants were
made unlawful. And so wine started flowing in the streets of Medina. Abu Talhah said: ‘Go out and spill it’,
and so I spilled it. But then one of the people said: ‘So-and-so and so-and-so were killed with wine in their
bellies’. As a result, Allah, exalted is He, revealed (There shall be no sin (imputed) unto those who believe
and do good works for what they may have eaten (in the past))”. Narrated by Muslim from Abu’l-Rabi‘ and
by Bukhari from Abu Nu‘man and both Abu’l-Rabi‘ and Abu Nu‘man narrated it from Hammad. Abu ‘Abd Allah
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Muzakki informed us> Abu ‘Amr ibn Matar> Abu Khalifah> Abu’l-Walid Shu‘bah>
Abu Ishaq> al-Bara’ ibn ‘Azib who said: “A group of Companions of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give
him peace, died while still drinking wine. When intoxicants were made unlawful, some said: ‘What will
happen to our companions? They have died while still drinking wine’. And so this verse was revealed: (There
shall be no sin (imputed) unto those who believe and do good works for what they may have eaten (in the
past))”.

[5:100]
(Say: The evil and the good are not alike…)

[5:100]. Al-Hakim Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Shadhyakhi informed
us> al-Hakim Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad ibn ‘Ubayd Allah al-Bayyi‘> Muhammad ibn al-Qasim al-Mu’addib>
Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub al-Razi> Idris ibn ‘Ali al-Razi> Yahya ibn al-Durays> Sufyan> Muhammad ibn
Suqah> Muhammad ibn al-Munkadir> Jabir who reported that the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace, said: “Allah, glorious and majestic is He, has made unlawful for you the worship of idols, the
consumption of intoxicants and the slandering of lineages. Indeed, cursed is the one who drinks wine, and
cursed is the one who presses the grapes from which it is made, cursed is the one who serves it and cursed
is the one who uses the money gotten from selling it”. A Bedouin stood up and said: “O Messenger of Allah,
trading in wine used to be my job and I made some money from it, will that money be of any benefit to me
if I used it in Allah’s obedience?” The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, answered him: “It would
not benefit you a bit if you were to spend it on pilgrimage, Jihad or charity, for Allah does not accept except
that which is wholesome”. Confirming the words of His Messenger, Allah bless him and give him peace,
Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Say: The evil and the good are not alike even though the plenty of the evil
attract thee). 
74

[5:101]
(O ye who believe! Ask not of things which, if they were made unto you, would trouble you…)

[5:101]. 'Amr
ibn 'Amr al-Muzakki informed us> Muhammad ibn Makki> Muhammad ibn Yusuf> Muhammad ibn Isma'il
Bukhari> al-Fadl ibn Sahl> Abu'l-Nadr> Abu Khaythamah> Abu Juwayriyyah> Ibn 'Abbas who said: “Some
people used to put questions to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, to mock him. One would
ask him: 'Who is my father?' and another who has lost his camel: 'Where is my camel?' And so Allah, exalted
is He, revealed about them this verse (O ye who believe! Ask not of things which, if they were made unto
you, would trouble you) up to the end of the verse”. Abu Sa'id al-Nasruyiyy informed us> Abu Bakr alQati'i> 'Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal> Ahmad ibn Hanbal> Mansur ibn Wardan al-Asdi> 'Ali ibn 'Abd alA'la> his father> Abu'l-Bukhturi> 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, may Allah be well pleased with him, who said: “When the
verse (And pilgrimage to the House is a duty unto Allah for mankind)

[5:105]
(O ye who believe! Ye have charge of your own souls. He who erreth cannot injure you if ye are rightly
guided)

[5:105]. Al-Kalbi reported from Abu Salih who related that Ibn 'Abbas said: “The Messenger of Allah
sent a letter to the people of Hajar, whose chief was Mundhir ibn Sawa, inviting them to Islam, or to pay the
Jizyah if they chose not to embrace Islam. When Mundhir ibn Sawa received the letter, he showed it to the
Arabs, Jews, Christians, Sabeans and Magians who were around him. They all agreed to pay the Jizyah and
disliked embracing Islam. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, wrote back to him,
saying: 'As for the Arabs, do not accept from them except Islam otherwise they will have nothing but the
sword. As for the people of the Book and the Magians, accept the Jizyah from them. When this letter was
read to them, the Arabs embraced Islam while the people of the Book and the Magians agreed to pay the
Jizyah. The hypocrites among the Arabs said: 'How strange from Muhammad! He claims that Allah has sent
him to fight all people until they surrender to Allah and does not accept the Jizyah except from the people of
the Book. But we only see that he has accepted from the idolaters of the people of Hajar that which he had
rejected from the Arab idolaters'. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed (O ye who believe! Ye have charge of
your own souls. He who erreth cannot injure you if ye are rightly guided), i.e. who errs from amongst the
people of the Book”.

[5:106]
(O ye who believe! Let there be witnesses between you…)

[5:106]. Abu Sa'id ibn Abi Bakr al-Razi informed
us> Abu 'Amr ibn Hamdan> Abu Ya'la> al-Harith ibn Shurayh> Yahya ibn Zakariyya ibn Abi Za'idah>
Muhammad ibn Abu'l-Qasim> 'Abd al-Malik ibn Sa'id ibn Jubayr> his father> Ibn 'Abbas who said: “Tamim
al-Dari and 'Adiyy ibn Badda' used to come to Mecca. On one occasion, a man from Quraysh, from Banu
Sahm, travelled with the two of them. However, this man died in a land where there was not a single Muslim
and he had to entrust them with his belongings, with the understanding that they were to be given to his
family. When the two of them arrived, they gave his belongings to his family but kept to themselves a silver
bowl adorned with layers of gold. They denied having seen this bowl when they were asked about it. The
two men were taken to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, who asked them to swear that they
neither saw the bowl nor did they keep it. When they swore, he let them go. Later this bowl was found with
some of the people of Mecca who said that they had bought it from Tamim al-Dari and 'Adiyy ibn Badda'.
The heirs of the man from Banu Sahm took the bowl and two men from among them swore that the bowl
belonged to their man, that their testimony is truer than the testimony of the other two men and that they
did not transgress. These two verses were revealed about this event (O ye who believe! Let there be
witnesses between you) up to the end”.

[5:108]. Said ibn ‘Abbas, according to the report of al-Walibi: “They [the idolaters] said: ‘O Muhammad,
either you stop reviling our idols or we will revile your Lord’. And so Allah, exalted is He, warned against
reviling their idols lest they wrongfully revile Allah through ignorance”. Qatadah said: “The Muslims used to
revile the idols of the unbelievers and the latter used to react against them. Allah, exalted is He, therefore,
warned the Muslims against being the cause which drives ignorant unbelievers, who have no knowledge of
Allah, to revile Allah as a result of reviling their idols”. Said al-Suddi: “When Abu Talib was dying, [some
chiefs of] the Quraysh said: ‘let us go to this man and ask him to forbid his nephew from reviling our idols,
for we feel shame to kill him after he passes away and drive the Arabs to say: ‘He used to defend him but
once he passed away, they killed him’. And so Abu Sufyan, Abu Jahl, al-Nadr ibn al-Harith, Umayyah and
Ubayy the sons of Khalaf, ‘Uqbah ibn Abi Mu‘ayt, ‘Amr ibn al-‘As, al-Aswad ibn al-Bukhturi went to see Abu
Talib. They said to him: ‘You are our master and chief, but Muhammad has harmed us and harmed our
idols. We would like you to call him and warn him against speaking ill of our idols. And from our part, we will
leave him alone to his Allah’. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, went when he was
summoned. Abu Talib said to him: ‘These are your people and cousins!’ The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace, asked them: ‘What do you want?’ They said: ‘We want you to leave us alone with
our idols and we will leave you alone with your Allah’. Abu Talib said: ‘Your people are being fair with you,
so give your consent’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: ‘If I agree to this
would you agree to give me one sentence, if you were to utter it, you would rule over the Arabs and nonArabs alike?’ Abu Jahl said: ‘Yes, by your father, we will give it to you and also give you ten other things like
it; but what is it? He said: ‘Say: there is no god but Allah!’ They refused and expressed their aversion at this
proposal, upon which Abu Talib said; ‘Son of my brother, ask for something else, for your people are wary of
this’. He said: ‘O uncle, I am not one who would ask for other than that. If they were to place the sun in my
hand, I would not ask for anything other than that’. The chiefs of Quraysh said: ‘You would better stop
reviling our idols or we will revile you and revile He Who commands you’. And so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed this verse”.