[6:7]
75
(Had we sent down unto thee (Muhammad) (actual) writing upon parchment…)

[6:7]. Said al-Kalbi: “The
idolaters of Mecca said: ‘O Muhammad, by Allah we will not believe until you bring us a book from Allah
along with four angels with it, bearing witness that it is from Allah and that you are His messenger’, and so
this verse was revealed”.

[6:13]
(Unto Him belongeth whatsoever resteth in the night and the day…)

[6:13]. Reporting from Ibn ‘Abbas, alKalbi said: “The disbelievers of Mecca went to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace
and said to him: ‘O Muhammad, we know that it is need that drives you to that which you are inviting us.
We will therefore give you part of our wealth so that you become the richest man amongst us, on condition
that you abandon this matter’. And then this verse was revealed”.

[6:19]
((O Muhammad): What thing is of most weight in testimony?)

[6:19]. Said al-Kalbi: “The chiefs of Mecca
said: ‘O Muhammad, we see that no one believes in what you say concerning the matter of messengership.
We have asked the Jews and Christians about you and they claim that there is no description or mention of
you in their Scriptures. So show us someone who will testify that you are a messenger, as you claim’. As a
response, Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.

[6:25]
(Of them are some who listen unto thee…)

[6:25]. Abu Salih reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “Abu Sufyan ibn
Harb, al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah, al-Nadr ibn al-Harith, ‘Utbah and Shaybah the sons of Rabi‘ah and Umayyah
and Ubayy the sons of Khalaf listened to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
[reciting the Qur’an], and so they asked al-Nadr: ‘O Abu Qutaylah, what does Muhammad say?’ He said: ‘By
Him who has made it [the Ka‘bah ] His House, I do not know what he is saying, except that I see his lips
moving, muttering something. But what he says is nothing but the fables of the people of old, like the
stories I used to relate to you regarding bygone nations’. Al-Nadr used to talk abundantly about bygone
nations. He used to relate this to the Quraysh who listened to what he had to say. Then, Allah, exalted is
He, revealed this verse”.

[6:26]
(And they forbid (men) from it and avoid it…)

[6:26]. 'Abd al-Rahman ibn 'Abdan informed us> Muhammad
ibn 'Abd Allah ibn Nu'aym> 'Ali ibn Hamshadh> Muhammad ibn Mandah al-Asfahani> Bakr ibn Bakkar>
Hamzah ibn Habib> Habib ibn Thabit> Sa'id ibn Jubayr> Ibn 'Abbas who said, regarding Allah's word (And
they forbid (men) from it and avoid it…): “It was revealed about Abu Talib who used to warn the idolaters
against harming the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, but, at the same time, kept
away from that which was revealed to him”. This was also the opinion of 'Ata' ibn Dinar and al-Qasim ibn
Mukhaymarah. Said Muqatil: “This is because the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
went to see Abu Talib to invite him to embrace Islam when the Quraysh gathered at Abu Talib's, intending
to harm the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace. Abu Talib said: By Allah, they will not reach to you
with all their numbers Until I am laid buried in the ground. So carry on with you matter unobstructed And
receive a glad tiding and peace of mind. And you have presented a religion which is most certainly One of
the best religions on earth. Had it not been for fear of reproach or being insulted You would have found me
a firm believer in it. Allah, exalted is He, revealed: (And they forbid (men) from it and avoid it)”. Said
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, al-Suddi and al-Dahhak: “This was revealed about the unbelievers of Mecca.
They used to forbid people from following Muhammad, Allah bless him and give him peace, and they
themselves stayed away from him”. This is also the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas according to the report of alWalibi.

[6:33]
(We know well how their talk grieveth thee…)

[6:33]. Said al-Suddi: “Al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq and Abu Jahl 
76
ibn Hisham met with each other and the former said to the latter: 'O Abu'l-Hakam, tell me about
Muhammad, for there is one here with us who wants to hear what you say: is he truthful or a liar?' Abu Jahl
responded: 'By Allah, Muhammad is truthful. Muhammad has never lied. But if Banu Qusayy take the office
of keepers of the banner, giving water to the pilgrims, gatekeeper of the House, the Nadwah and
prophethood, what else remains for the rest of Quraysh?' And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.
Said Abu Maysarah: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, once passed by Abu Jahl
and his companions, and they asked him: 'O Muhammad, by Allah, we do not give you the lie, for we
consider you truthful. What we deny is that which you have brought'. And so this verse was revealed
(though in truth they deny not thee (Muhammad) but evil-doers flout the revelations of Allah)”. Said Muqatil:
“This verse was revealed about al-Harith ibn 'Amir ibn Nawfal ibn 'Abd Manaf ibn Qusayy ibn Kilab. This man
used to give the lie openly to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, but when he retired to his
family, he would say: 'Muhammad is not of those who lie, and I think he is truthful', and so Allah, exalted is
He, revealed this verse”.

[6:52]
(Repel not those who call upon their Lord at morn and evening, seeking His Countenance…)

[6:52]. Abu
'Abd al-Rahman Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ja'far informed us> Zahir ibn Ahmad> al-Husayn ibn
Muhammad ibn Mus'ab> Yahya ibn Hakim> Abu Dawud> Qays ibn al-Rabi'> al-Miqdam ibn Shurayh> his
father> Sa'd who said: “This verse was revealed about six of us: it was revealed about me, ['Abd Allah] ibn
Mas'ud, Suhayb [al-Rumi], 'Ammar [ibn Yasir], al-Miqdad [ibn 'Amr] and Bilal [ibn Rabah]. The Quraysh said
to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace: 'We do not accept to be followers of these,
so repel them'. Some of what they said entered the heart of Allah's Messenger, Allah bless him and give him
peace, as much as Allah willed it to enter. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Repel not those who call
upon their Lord at morn and evening, seeking His Countenance…)”. This was narrated by Muslim from
Zuhayr ibn Harb from 'Abd al-Rahman from Sufyan from al-Miqdam. Abu 'Abd al-Rahman informed us> Abu
Bakr ibn Abu Zakariyya al-Shaybani> Abu'l-'Abbas Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman> Abu Salih al-Husayn ibn
al-Faraj> Muhammad ibn Muqatil al-Marwazi> Hakim ibn Zayd> al-Suddi> Abu Sa'id>> Abu'l-Kanud>
Khabbab ibn al-Aratt who said: “This verse was revealed about us. We were weak and stayed at the
Prophet's, Allah bless him and give him peace, in the morning and evening. He taught us the Qur'an and
goodness and instilled fear in us through the mention of hellfire and the Garden and also through that which
benefits us and by means of mention of death and the Resurrection. One day, al-Aqra' ibn Habis al-Tamimi
and 'Uyaynah ibn Hisn al-Fazari came to the Prophet and said: 'We are among the nobles of our people and
we dislike that we be seen with them, so could you repel them when we sit with you?' The Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, agreed, but they said: 'We will not be pleased until you write an agreement
between us'. When skin and ink were brought, these verses were revealed (Repel not those who call upon
their Lord at morn and evening, seeking His Countenance) up to His words (And even so do We try some of
them by others)

[6:53]”. Abu Bakr al-Harithi informed us> Abu Muhammad ibn Hayyan> Abu Yahya alRazi> Sahl ibn 'Uthman> Asbat ibn Muhammad> Ash'ath> Kurdus> Ibn Mas'ud who said: “A group of
people from Quraysh passed by the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, while he had
with him Khabbab ibn al-Aratt, Suhayb, Bilal and 'Ammar, and they said: 'O Muhammad, are you pleased
with these? Do you want us to be followers of these?' And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Repel not those
who call upon their Lord at morn and evening, seeking His Countenance)”. And with the same chain of
transmission, 'Ubayd Allah related to us> Abu Ja'far> al-Rabi' who said: “There were some men who were
always forerunners to the assembly of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. Among
these men were Bilal, 'Ammar, Suhayb and Salman [al-Farisi]. The nobles and chiefs of his people would
come to see him and find all the aforementioned already sitting with him. In one occasion they said: 'Suhayb
is a Byzantine, Salman a Persian, Bilal an Abyssinian: they all come and sit close to him whereas when we
come we sit on the side'. And then they mentioned this to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace. They said to him: 'We are the nobles and chiefs of your clan, why do you not sit closer to us
when we come to see you'. He was about to do just that when Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.
Said 'Ikrimah: “A group of unbeliever nobles from Banu 'Abd Manaf headed by 'Utbah ibn Rabi'ah, Shaybah
ibn Rabi'ah, Mut'im ibn 'Adiyy, al-Harith ibn Nawfal went to Abu Talib and said: 'If only your nephew
Muhammad repels from him our clients, slaves and downtrodden, it would please us, mean a great deal to
us and would be a step forward for us to follow him and believe in him'. Abu Talib went and conveyed to the
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, what they said. 'Umar ibn al-Khattab commented: 'Why do you 
77
not do as they ask so that we consider what they want and verify whether they are truthful?' Then Allah,
exalted is He, revealed this verse. When it was revealed, 'Umar ibn al-Khattab went and apologized for what
he had said”.

[6:54]
(And when those who believe in Our revelations come unto thee, say: Peace be unto you!)

[6:54]. Said
'Ikrimah: “This verse was revealed about those whom Allah, exalted is He, had forbidden His Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, from repelling. Whenever the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace,
saw them, he greeted them first with the greeting of peace, and then said: 'Praise be to Allah Who has
made in my community people whom He has commanded me to initiate their greeting with the greeting of
peace' ”. Said Mahan al-Hanafi: “The clan of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, went to him
and said: 'We have committed enormous sins', and I think he answered them with something. When they
left, this verse was revealed (And when those who believe in Our revelations come…)”.

[6:57]
(Say: I am (relying) on clear proof from my Lord…)

[6:57]. Said al-Kalbi: “This verse was revealed about alNadr ibn al-Harith and the chiefs of Quraysh. They used to say mockingly to the Prophet: ‘O Muhammad
bring on us the chastisement you promised us’, and so this verse was revealed”.

[6:91]
(And they measure not the power of Allah its true measure when they say: Allah hath naught revealed unto
a human being…)

[6:91]. Al-Walibi reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said: “The Jews said to the Prophet: ‘O
Muhammad, has Allah revealed a Scripture to you?’ The Prophet answered: ‘Yes, He did!’ They said: ‘By
Allah, Allah has never sent down any Scripture from heaven’. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed (Say (unto
the Jews who speak thus): Who revealed the Book which Moses brought, a light and guidance for
mankind…)”. Muhammad ibn Ka‘b al-Quradi said: “Allah commanded Muhammad, Allah bless him and give
him peace, to ask the people of the Book about his matter and how he is mentioned in their Scriptures.
However, their resentful envy toward Muhammad drove them to disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger. They
said: ‘Allah has never revealed anything to any human being’. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this
verse”. Sa‘id ibn Jubayr said: “A Jew by the name of Malik ibn al-Sayf went to argue with the Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said to him: ‘I plead with
you by Him Who has revealed the Torah to Moses, do you not find in the Torah that Allah loathes the fat
rabbi?’ Because this Jew was a fat rabbi, he got angry and said: ‘By Allah, Allah has never sent anything to
any human being’. Horrified, his companions exclaimed: ‘Woe unto you, not even to Moses!’ He said: ‘By
Allah, Allah has never sent anything to any human being’. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.

[6:93]
(Who is guilty of more wrong than he who forgeth a lie against Allah, or saith: I am inspired…)

[6:93]. This
was revealed about the liar, Musaylimah al-Hanafi. This man was a soothsayer who composed rhymed
speech and claimed prophethood. He claimed that he was inspired by Allah. (… and who saith: I will reveal
the like of that which Allah hath revealed?)

[6:93]. This verse was revealed about 'Abd Allah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi
Sarh. This man had declared his faith in Islam and so the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, called him one day to write something for him. When the verses regarding the believers were
revealed (Verily, We created man from a product of wet earth…)

[6:100]
(Yet they ascribe as partners unto Him the jinn…)

[6:100]. Al-Kalbi said: “This verse was revealed about the
atheists who claimed that Allah and Satan were two brothers; that Allah was the creator of human beings,
beasts and cattle whereas Satan was the creator of vipers, predatory animals and scorpions. Hence Allah’s
saying (Yet they ascribe as partners unto Him the jinn)”.

[6:108]
(Revile not those unto whom they pray beside Allah lest they wrongfully revile Allah through ignorance…)

[6:109-111]
(And they swear a solemn oath by Allah that if there come unto them a portent they will believe therein...)

[6:109] up to (Howbeit, most of them are ignorant)

[6:111]. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Fadl informed us>
Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub al-Umawi> Ahmad ‘Abd al-Jabbar> Yunus ibn Bukayr> Abu Ma‘shar> Muhammad
ibn Ka‘b who said: “The Quraysh spoke to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. They
said: ‘You inform us that Moses, peace be upon him, had a staff with which he struck a stone and twelve
springs gushed forth, and that Jesus, peace be upon him, revived the dead, and that Thamud had a camel;
why do you not bring us some of those signs so that we believe in you?’ The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace, asked them: ‘What sign do you want me to bring you?’ They said: ‘Turn [mount]
al-Safa into gold’. He said: ‘Would you believe in me if I did as you ask?’ They said: ‘Yes, by Allah, if you do,
we will all follow you’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, stood up and began
supplicating. Then, Gabriel, peace be upon him, came to him and said: ‘If you wish, I can turn al-Safa into 
79
gold. However, never did I send a sign that people disbelieved in except that I sent chastisement after it. If
you wish, I will leave them until some of them decide to repent’. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, said: ‘Leave them until some of them decide to repent’. And so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed (And they swear a solemn oath by Allah that if there come unto them a portent they will believe
therein) up to His words (… they would not believe unless Allah so willed…)

[6:111]”.

[6:121]
(And eat not of that whereon Allah's name hath not been mentioned…)

[6:121]. The idolaters said: “O
Muhammad, tell us: 'When a sheep dies, who has killed it?' He said: 'Allah killed it!' They said: 'How is it
then that that which is killed by you and your Companions is lawful, that which is killed by a dog or bird of
prey is lawful but that which is killed by Allah is unlawful?' And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.
Said 'Ikrimah: “When Allah, exalted is He, revealed the unlawfulness of the meat of carrion, the Magians
among the people of Persia wrote to the idolaters of Quraysh, who were their allies in the pre-Islamic period
and kept contact with each other, that Muhammad and his Companions claim that they follow the command
of Allah but then say that what they slaughter is lawful and that which is slaughtered by Allah is unlawful.
This caused doubt in the minds of some Muslims, and so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.

[6:122]
(Is he who was dead and We have raised him unto life…)

[6:122]. Said Ibn ‘Abbas: “This refers to Hamzah
ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib and Abu Jahl. This is because Abu Jahl had thrown the refuse of an animal on the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, when Hamzah was not a believer yet. Hamzah was
informed about the deed of Abu Jahl upon his return from hunting and he still had his bow in his hand.
Hamzah went straight to Abu Jahl and hit him with his bow while Abu Jahl begged him, saying: ‘O Abu Ya‘la,
do you not see what he has brought; he has ridiculed our understanding, reviled our idols and opposed our
forefathers’. Hamzah responded: ‘And who is more foolish than you? You worship stones instead of Allah. I
bear witness that there is no god but Allah, without associates, and that Muhammad is His slave and
Messenger’. And then Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”. Abu Bakr al-Harithi informed us> Abu
Muhammad ibn Hayyan> ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub and al-Walid ibn Aban> Abu Hatim> Abu
Taqqi> Baqiyyah ibn al-Walid> Mubashshir ibn ‘Ubayd> Zayd ibn Aslam said: “Allah’s words (Is he who was
dead and We have raised him unto life, and set for him a light wherein he walketh among men) refer to
‘Umar ibn al-Khattab while His words (as him whose similitude is in utter darkness whence he cannot
emerge) refers to Abu Jahl ibn Hisham”.