[53:19-
20], the devil put on his tongue what he had secretly wished and hoped for and said: 'These are the mighty
cranes (gharaniq) and their intercession is hoped for'. When the Quraysh heard this, they were very pleased.
The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, carried on reciting until the end of the Surah
and then prostrated. All the Muslims followed suit and prostrated, and all the idolaters who were present
prostrated too. All those who were present, whether Muslim or disbeliever, prostrated except al-Walid ibn alMughirah and Abu Uhyahah Sa'id ibn al-'As who were too advanced in age and could not prostrate, but they
both grabbed a handful of dust and put their foreheads on it. The Quraysh then dispersed, happy with what
they heard. They said: 'Muhammad has mentioned our idols with complimentary terms. We know that Allah
gives life and takes it away, He creates and provides sustenance, but these idols of ours will intercede for us
with Him. Now that Muhammad has associated them, we are all with him'. That evening, Gabriel, peace be
upon him, went to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: 'What have you
done? You recited to people that which I did not bring from Allah, glorified is He, and you said what I did
not say to you'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, felt very saddened and was
greatly scared of Allah. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse, upon which the Quraysh said:
'Muhammad has regretted what he has mentioned regarding the status of our idols vis-à-vis Allah'. And they
became even more antagonistic than before”. Abu Bakr al-Harithi informed us> Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn
Hayyan> Abu Yahya al-Razi> Sahl al-'Askari> Yahya> 'Uthman ibn al-Aswad> Sa'id ibn Jubayr who said:
“The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, recited (Have ye thought upon al-Lat and al-
'Uzza, and Manat, the third, the other) upon which the devil projected on his tongue: 'These are the mighty
cranes and their intercession is hoped for'. The idolaters were pleased. They said: 'He has mentioned our
idols'. Then Gabriel, peace be upon him, came to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, and said: 'Read back to me the speech of Allah'. When he read it to him, Gabriel said: 'As for this I
did not bring; this is from the devil'. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Never sent We a messenger or a
prophet before thee but when He recited (the message) Satan proposed (opposition) in respect of that
which he recited thereof. But Allah abolisheth that which Satan proposeth. Then Allah establisheth His
revelations…)”.

[53:32]
(… He is Best Aware of you (from the time) when He created you from the earth…)

[53:32]. Abu Bakr ibn alHarith informed us> Abu’l-Shaykh al-Hafiz> Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan> Ahmad ibn Sa‘d> Ibn
Wahb> Abu Lahi‘ah> al-Harith ibn Zayd> Thabit ibn al-Harith al-Ansari who said: “The Jews used to say 
144
when they lost a young boy: ‘He is a Tsadoq (Siddiq)’. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace,
heard of this and commented: ‘The Jews have lied. No living person that Allah creates in the womb of his
mother except that it is either felicitous or damned’. Upon which Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse (…
He is Best Aware of you (from the time) when He created you from the earth, and when ye were hidden in
the bellies of your mothers…)”.

[53:33-34]
(Didst thou (O Muhammad) observe him who turned away, And gave a little, then was grudging?)

[53:33-
34]. Ibn ‘Abbas, al-Suddi and al-Musayyib ibn Sharik said: “This was revealed about ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan who
used to spend his wealth on alms and good causes. His milk brother, ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi Sarh, said to him:
‘What is this that you are doing? You have almost nothing left’. ‘Uthman said: ‘I have committed sins and
mistakes and I seek the pleasure of Allah, glorious and majestic is He, in that which I do; I hope He will
pardon me’. ‘Abd Allah said to him: ‘Give me your camel with its load and I will bear for you all your sins’. He
gave him what he asked for and got people to witness it. He also stopped giving some of the alms he used
to give. Allah, glorious and majestic is He, therefore, revealed (Didst thou (O Muhammad) observe him who
turned away, And gave a little, then was grudging?) upon which ‘Uthman returned to what he used to do;
he did even better”. Mujahid and Ibn Zayd said: “This was revealed about al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah. The
latter had followed the religion of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. But one of the
idolaters reviled him for it, saying: ‘Why did you leave the religion of the elders whom you claimed were in
error and are abiding in hellfire?’ He said: ‘I feared Allah’s chastisement’. The man gave him assurances that
he will bear in his stead the chastisement of Allah, glorious and majestic is He, in exchange for some of his
wealth and on condition that he reverts to his idolatry. Al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah gave the man some of what
they had agreed but then felt miserly and refused to give him the rest. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed
this verse”.

[53:43]
(And that He it is who maketh laugh, and maketh weep)

[53:43]. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim alWa‘iz informed us> Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Thaqafi> ‘Abd Allah ibn al-Fadl>
Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al-Maqdimi> Dalal bint Abi al-Mudil> al-Sahba’> ‘A’ishah who said: “One day, the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, passed by a group of people who were laughing, so
he said: ‘If you knew what I know, you would cry a lot and laugh very little’. Gabriel, peace be upon him,
then came down to him and said: ‘Allah, exalted is He, says (And that He it is who maketh laugh, and
maketh weep)’. So he went back to the group of people and said: ‘I did not walk even forty steps when
Gabriel, peace be upon him, met me and said: Go to those people and say to them that Allah, glorious and
majestic is He, says: (And that He it is who maketh laugh, and maketh weep)’ ”.