[58:1]
(Allah hath heard the saying of her that disputeth with thee (Muhammad) concerning her husband…)

[58:1].
Abu Sa‘d Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Ghazi informed us> Abu ‘Amr Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Hiri>
Ahmad ibn ‘Ali al-Muthanna> Abu Bakr ibn Abi Shaybah> Muhammad ibn Abi ‘Ubaydah> his father> alA‘mash> Tamim ibn Salamah> ‘Urwah who reported that ‘A’ishah said: “Glory be to Him Whose hearing
encompass all things; I could hear the speech of Khawlah bint Tha‘labah, even though not in full, while she
was complaining about her husband to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. She
said: ‘He has worn out my youth and I let him physically enjoy me but when I grew older and could no
longer bear children, he put me away, saying that I am as his mother. O Allah, I complain to you’. She did
not move from her position until Gabriel came down with these verses (Allah hath heard the saying of her
that disputeth with thee (Muhammad) concerning her husband, and complaineth unto Allah…)”. This was
narrated by al-Hakim Abu ‘Abd Allah in his Sahih> Muhammad al-Muzani> Mutayr> Abu Kurayb>
Muhammad ibn Abi ‘Ubaydah. Abu Bakr ibn al-Harith informed us> Abu’l-Shaykh al-Hafiz al-Asfahani>
‘Abdan ibn Ahmad> Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Sa‘id> Yahya ibn ‘Isa al-Ramli> al-A‘mash>
Tamim ibn Salamah> ‘Urwah> ‘A’ishah who said: “Praise be to Allah Who can hear all sounds! The woman
disputant came and spoke with the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, while I was at
one side of the room and I did not understand what she was saying. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed
(Allah hath heard the saying of her that disputeth with thee (Muhammad) concerning her husband…)”.

[58:2]
(Such of you as put away your wives (by saying they are as their mothers)…)

[58:2]. Abu Mansur
Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Mansuri informed us> 'Ali ibn 'Umar al-Hafiz> Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ziyad
al-Naysaburi> Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Ash'ath> Muhammad ibn Bakkar> Sa'id ibn Bashir that he asked
Qatadah about putting away one's wife declaring her to be as one's mother, and he informed him that Anas
ibn Malik said: “Aws ibn al-Samit put away his wife, Khuwaylah bint Tha'labah, declaring her as his mother
and the latter went to complain to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. She said: 'He
put me away, declaring me to be as his mother, when I grew old and my strength failed'. And so Allah,
exalted is He, revealed the verse of putting one's wife away, declaring her to be as one's mother. The
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said to Aws: 'You have to free one slave'. He said: 'I
cannot afford it!' The Prophet said: 'Then you have to fast two consecutive months'. Aws said: 'If I fail to eat
twice a day, my sight suffers'. The Prophet said: 'Then you have to feed sixty needy people'. Aws said: 'I
cannot do it unless you help me'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, helped him
with fifteen measures (sa') [of dates] and Allah enabled him to gather what was necessary to feed sixty
needy people, and Allah is merciful - they were of the opinion that Aws already had with him fifteen
measures, in order to feed sixty needy people”. 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi Hamid al-'Adl informed us> 
148
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allah ibn Zakariyya> Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman al-Daghuli>
Abu'l-Hasan Ahmad ibn Siyar> 'Abd al-'Aziz ibn Yahya ibn Yusuf> Abu'l-Asbagh al-Harrani> Muhammad ibn
Maslamah> Muhammad ibn Ishaq> Ma'mar ibn 'Abd Allah ibn Hanzalah> Yusuf ibn 'Abd Allah ibn Salam
who said: “Khuwaylah bint Tha'labah, the wife of Aws ibn al-Samit, the brother of 'Ubadah ibn al-Samit,
related to me, saying: 'He [Aws] came in one day and said something to me in an irritated tone. I answered
him back and he got angry. He said: 'You are to me as my mother'. He then went out to the gathering place
of his people. When he came back he wanted to seduce me but I refused. He wanted to force himself on me
but I was able to push him back as can a woman usually do with a weak man. I said: 'Nay, by Him in Whose
Hand is Khuwaylah's soul, you will not touch me until Allah, exalted is He, issues His ruling concerning us'. I
then went to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, to complain about what I have been through.
But he said: 'He is your husband and cousin; fear Allah and treat him well'. However, I did not leave until
the Qur'an was revealed (Allah hath heard the saying of her that disputeth with thee (Muhammad)
concerning her husband) up to His words (Lo! Allah is Hearer, Knower). When he got to the expiation, he
said: 'Tell him to free a slave'. I said: 'O Prophet of Allah, by Allah he does not have any slave to free'. He
said: 'Tell him to fast two consecutive months'. I said: 'O Prophet of Allah, by Allah he is an old man and
unable to fast'. He said: 'Then let him feed sixty needy people'. I said: 'O Prophet of Allah, by Allah he does
not have what to feed them with'. He said: 'In that case, we will help him with a 'Arq of dates [30 measures
(Sa') of dates]'. I said: 'And I will help him with another 'Arq'. He said: 'Good of you; let him spend it in
charity' ”.

[58:8]
(Hast thou not observed those who were forbidden conspiracy…)

[58:8]. Ibn 'Abbas and Mujahid said that
this verse was revealed about the Jews and the hypocrites. This is because the latter used to talk secretly
amongst themselves to the exclusion of the believers and then look at the believers and wink at each other.
When the believers saw their secret communications, they said: “We think that they are doing this because
they received news about our relatives and brothers who went out in military expeditions. They have been
killed, wounded or defeated”. But when these secret conversations continued, they complained to the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and he commanded them not to speak in secret to
the exclusion of the believers. They did not heed his command and went back to secret conversations
among themselves. Allah, exalted is He, therefore revealed this verse. (And when they come unto thee they
greet thee with a greeting wherewith Allah greeteth thee not…)

[58:8]. Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn 'Umar alKhashshsab informed us> Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn 'Abd Allah al-Asfahani> Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Sarraj>
Qutaybah ibn Sa'id> Jarir> al-A'mash> Abu'l-Duha> Masruq> 'A'ishah who said: “Some Jews came to the
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said 'Al-Sam to you, O Abu'l-Qasim!' And so I replied: 'AlSam to you too, and may Allah take you away!' The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
said: 'Stop, O 'A'ishah! For Allah, exalted is He, does not like indecency nor the uttering of indecent words'. I
said: 'O Messenger of Allah, did you not hear what they said?' He said: 'Do you not see that I have sent back
to them what they said. I said: the same to you'. This verse was revealed about this (And when they come
unto thee they greet thee with a greeting wherewith Allah greeteth thee not)”. Abu Sa'id Muhammad ibn
'Abd al-Rahman al-Ghazi informed us> Abu 'Amr Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Hiri> Ahmad ibn 'Ali alMuthanna> Zuhayr ibn Muhammad> Yunus ibn Muhammad> Shayban> Qatadah> Anas who said: “A
Jewish man came to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: 'Al-Sam be with you!' The
people who were present responded to him with the greetings of peace. The Prophet, Allah bless him and
give him peace, said to them: 'Do you know what this man said?' They said: 'O Prophet of Allah, Allah and
His Messenger know best, [but we think he said: al-Salam [peace be with you]'. He said: 'No, rather he said
such-and-such a thing. So drive it away from me'. They drove it away from him. He then asked the Jewish
man: 'Did you say: al-Sam be with you?' He said: 'Yes, I did'. Upon which the Prophet of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace, then said: 'When one of the people of the Book greets you, say to him in response:
And the same to you'. Then the words of Allah, Allah exalted is He, revealed (And when they come unto
thee they greet thee with a greeting wherewith Allah greeteth thee not)”.

[58:11]
(O ye who believe! when it is said unto you, Make room! in assemblies, then make room; Allah will make
way for you (hereafter)…)

[58:11]. Said Muqatil: “The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, was at 
149
al-Suffah. The place was not spacious and it was a Friday. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, had the habit of honouring those who had taken part in the Battle of Badr from among the
Emigrants and the Helpers. Some of those who had participated in Badr came to the gathering and found
that people were already there before them. They stood, therefore, facing toward the Prophet, Allah bless
him and give him peace, waiting for people to make room for them. But no one made room for them. The
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, was pained to see this and so he said to those
around him who did not take part in Badr: ‘So-and-so get up, and you get up’, and he moved as many
people as the number of those who were standing among the Companions who participated in the Battle of
Badr. Those who were asked to vacate their seats were not pleased and the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace, saw their displeasure on their faces. Then, the hypocrites said to the Muslims: ‘Did
you not claim that your man deals fairly with people? By Allah, he has not been fair with these people. He
removed people who wanted to be close to their Prophet from places in which they were already sitting and
seated in their stead people who came late!’ Allah, exalted is He, therefore revealed this verse”.

[58:12-13]
(O ye who believe! When ye hold conference with the messenger…)

[58:12-13]. Muqatil ibn Hayyan said:
“This was revealed about the rich. This is because they used to go to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give
him peace, and converse with him at length. In this fashion, they always beat the poor to the assemblies to
the extent that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, disliked their prolonged sitting
and conference. Allah, glorified and exalted is He, therefore revealed this verse and commanded that alms
be given upon each conference with the Prophet. As for those who had straitened means, they did not have
anything to give for alms, while those who were well off were niggardly. The Companions of the Prophet,
Allah bless him and give him peace, found this tough and so a dispensation was revealed”. ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib,
may Allah be well pleased with him, said: “There is one verse in the Book of Allah that no one has applied
before me nor is there anyone who has applied it after me. [It is] (O ye who believe! When ye hold
conference with the messenger…). I had a piece of gold which I exchanged for silver pieces and whenever I
conferred with the Messenger I spent one silver piece in charity until I spent them all. Then the verse was
abrogated with another verse (Fear ye to offer alms before your conference? ... and they will fancy that they
have some standing. Lo! is it not they who are the liars?)

[58:13]”.

[58:14-18]
(Hast thou not seen those who take for friends a folk with whom Allah is wroth?… and they will fancy that
they have some standing. Lo! is it not they who are the liars?)

[58:14-18]. Al-Suddi and Muqatil said: “This
was revealed about ‘Abd Allah ibn Nabtal, the hypocrite who used to keep the company of the Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, and then report what he heard from him to the Jews. As the Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, was sitting one day in one of his rooms he said: ‘Now shall enter
on you a man who has the heart of a tyrant and who looks through the eyes of the devil’. At that point ‘Abd
Allah ibn Nabtal who was blue of complexion came in. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him
peace, said to him: ‘Why do you, and your friends, insult me?’ He swore by Allah that he did not, but the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said that he did. The man went and brought his
friends who then swore by Allah that they did not insult him. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed these
verses”. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya informed us> Muhammad ibn Ja‘far ibn Matar>
Ja‘far ibn Muhammad al-Firyabi> Abu Ja‘far al-Nufayli> Zuhayr ibn Mu‘awiyah> Simak ibn Harb> Sa‘id ibn
Jubayr> Ibn ‘Abbas who related to him that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, was
sitting under the shade of one of his rooms with a group of Muslims from whom the shade was slowly
receding. He said to them: “A man will come to you and look at you with the eyes of the devil. When he
comes do not speak with him!” A man of blue complexion then came. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace, called him and addressed him: “Why do you and so-and-so and so-and-so (he
named a group of people) insult me?” The man left and brought all those named and they swore by Allah
and apologized. Allah, exalted is He, revealed (On the day when Allah will raise them all together, then will
they swear unto Him as they (now) swear unto you, and they will fancy that they have some standing. Lo! is
it not they who are the liars?). This was narrated by al-Hakim in his Sahih> al-Asamm> Ibn ‘Affan> ‘Amr al-
‘Anqari> Isra’il> Simak. 
150

[58:22]
(Thou wilt not find folk who believe in Allah and the Last Day loving those who oppose Allah and His
messenger…)

[58:22]. Said Ibn Jurayj: “It was related to me that Abu Quhafah insulted the Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, and as a result Abu Bakr [his son] struck him with such force that he fell to
the ground. Abu Bakr mentioned this to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, who exclaimed:
‘Did you really do it?’ Abu Bakr said: ‘Yes!’ ‘In that case do not do it again!’ said the Prophet, Allah bless him
and give him peace. Abu Bakr said: ‘By Allah, if a sword were at my reach I would have killed him!’ And so
Allah, glorified and exalted is He, revealed this verse”. It is also related that Ibn Mas‘ud said: “This verse was
revealed about Abu ‘Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah who killed his father ‘Abd Allah at the Battle of Uhud”. It was also
revealed about Abu Bakr who challenged his own son for a duel at the battle of Badr. He said: “O Messenger
of Allah, let me be among the first group [of martyrs]”. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, said to him: “Preserve yourself for us, O Abu Bakr! Do you not know that you are to me like my
hearing and sight?” The verse was also revealed about Mus‘ab ibn ‘Umayr who killed his brother ‘Umayr ibn
‘Umayr at the battle of Uhud. And it was also revealed about ‘Umar [ibn al-Khattab] who killed his maternal
uncle al-‘As ibn Hisham ibn al-Mughirah at the battle of Badr. And it was also revealed about ‘Ali, Hamzah
and ‘Ubaydah who killed ‘Utbah ibn Rabi‘ah, Shaybah ibn Rabi‘ah and al-Walid ibn ‘Utbah respectively at the
battle of Badr. Hence His words (even though they be their fathers or their sons or their brethren or their
clan).

[58:22]
(Thou wilt not find folk who believe in Allah and the Last Day loving those who oppose Allah and His
messenger…)

[58:22]. Said Ibn Jurayj: “It was related to me that Abu Quhafah insulted the Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, and as a result Abu Bakr [his son] struck him with such force that he fell to
the ground. Abu Bakr mentioned this to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, who exclaimed:
'Did you really do it?' Abu Bakr said: 'Yes!' 'In that case do not do it again!' said the Prophet, Allah bless him
and give him peace. Abu Bakr said: 'By Allah, if a sword were at my reach I would have killed him!' And so
Allah, glorified and exalted is He, revealed this verse”. It is also related that Ibn Mas'ud said: “This verse was
revealed about Abu 'Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah who killed his father 'Abd Allah at the Battle of Uhud”. It was also
revealed about Abu Bakr who challenged his own son for a duel at the Battle of Badr. He said: “O Messenger
of Allah, let me be among the first group [of martyrs]”. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, said to him: “Preserve yourself for us, O Abu Bakr! Do you not know that you are to me like my
hearing and sight?” The verse was also revealed about Mus'ab ibn 'Umayr who killed his brother 'Umayr ibn
'Umayr at the Battle of Uhud. And it was also revealed about 'Umar [ibn al-Khattab] who killed his maternal
uncle al-'As ibn Hisham ibn al-Mughirah at the Battle of Badr. And it was also revealed about 'Ali, Hamzah
and 'Ubaydah who killed 'Utbah ibn Rabi'ah, Shaybah ibn Rabi'ah and al-Walid ibn 'Utbah respectively at the
Battle of Badr. Hence His words (even though they be their fathers or their sons or their brethren or their
clan).