[59:1-6]
(All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifieth Allah… Allah is Able to do all things)

[59:1-6].
The commentators of the Qur'an said: “This verse was revealed about Banu'l-Nadir. When the Prophet, Allah
bless him and give him peace, moved to Medina, they signed a treaty with him in which they agreed not
fight against him or with him and the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, consented.
Then when the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, defeated the idolaters at Badr,
Banu'l-Nadir said: 'By Allah, he is the Prophet whose description we find in the Torah; he will not be
defeated'. However, when the Muslims were defeated at Uhud, they broke their pledge and showed enmity
toward the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, and Muslims. The Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, surrounded them and then they signed a settlement treaty in which it
was agreed that they leave Medina”. Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Farisi informed us>
Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allah ibn al-Fadl al-Tajir> Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Hafiz> Muhammad
ibn Yahya> 'Abd al-Razzaq> Ma'mar> al-Zuhri> Ibn Ka'b ibn Malik> one of the Companions of the Prophet, 
151
Allah bless him and give him peace, who related that the unbelievers of Quraysh wrote the following to the
Jews after the Battle of Badr: “You are people of armaments and fortresses. Verily, you either fight our man
or we shall do this and that, such that nothing will prevent us from the bracelets on your women's anklets”.
When their letter reached the Jews, the Banu'l-Nadir were unanimously in favour of treason. They sent to
the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, saying: “Come with thirty of your men and we will send
thirty of our men. Let us meet in a location halfway between you and us so that our men hear you and if
they believe in you, we will all believe in you”. However, when they reached a certain location, some Jews
said: “How are you going to get to him when he has with him thirty of his Companions who all desire to die
before him? Send to him and say: 'How are we going to understand [what you are going to say to us] when
there are sixty of us? Come along with three of your Companions and three of our scholars will meet you. If
they believe in you, we will all believe in you and follow'. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace,
proceeded with three of his Companions. On the other side, three Jews proceeded armed with knives,
intending to kill the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. A sincere woman advisor from
Banu'l-Nadir sent a message to her brother, a Muslim from the Helpers, informing him of the treachery
which the Banu'l-Nadir were planning against the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace.
Her brother hurriedly set off to see the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace. He caught up with him
and informed him of the plan, and so the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, went back. The
following day, he sent troops to them. He besieged their fortress and fought them until they agreed to move
out of Medina, carrying with them anything their camels could carry, except for armaments. They proceeded
to destroy their own houses and take whatever wood they could take with them. Allah, exalted is He,
therefore, revealed (All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifieth Allah… Allah is Able to do
all things)”. (Whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down…)

[59:5]. When the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him
and give him peace, headed toward Banu'l-Nadir and they took refuge in their fortresses, he ordered the
cutting down and burning of their palm-trees. The enemies of Allah were alarmed. They said: “You claim, O
Muhammad, that you seek goodness, is there any goodness in damaging productive trees and cutting down
palm-trees?” They also said to him: “Is corruption in the earth part of what you claim has been revealed to
you?” The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, was distressed upon hearing this, and the Muslims
were affected and feared that this may be an act of corruption. And they disagreed amongst themselves.
Some said: “Do not cut the palm-trees down for it is part of what Allah has given us as spoils”. Others said:
“We should rather cut them down!” And so Allah, glorified and exalted is He, revealed (Whatsoever palmtrees ye cut down…) confirming the opinion of those who warned against cutting the palm-trees down and,
at the same time, stating the lawfulness of cutting them down. He informed that the cutting down of trees
or leaving them standing is only by the leave of Allah, exalted is He. Abu 'Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Ibrahim
al-Muzakki informed us> his father> Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Thaqafi> Qutaybah> al-Layth ibn Sa'd> Nafi'>
Ibn 'Umar who related that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, burnt and cut down
the palm-trees of Banu'l-Nadir which were at al-Buwayrah. And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed
(Whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots, it was by Allah's leave, in order that He
might confound the evil-livers). This was narrated by Bukhari and Muslim from Qutaybah. Abu Bakr ibn alHarith informed us> 'Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Ja'far> Abu Yahya al-Razi> Sahl ibn 'Uthman> 'Abd Allah
ibn al-Mubarak> Musa ibn 'Uqbah> Nafi'> Ibn 'Umar who related that the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace, burnt and cut down the palm-trees of Banu'l-Nadir at al-Buwayrah, and it is about
this that Hassan said: The trees of Banu Lu'ayy were deemed unworthy In front of the raging fire at alBuwayrah. It is also about this that this verse (Whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their
roots, it was by Allah's leave…). This was narrated by Muslim> Sa'id ibn Mansur> Ibn al-Mubarak. Abu Bakr
informed us> 'Abd Allah> Salm ibn 'Isam> Rustah> 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi> Muhammad ibn Maymun
ibn al-Tammar> Jurmuz> Hatim al-Najjar> 'Ikrimah> Ibn 'Abbas who said: “A Jew came to the Prophet,
Allah bless him and give him peace, and said: 'I will stand up and pray', The Prophet said to him: 'Allah has
decreed for you that you pray'. The man said: 'I will sit down', and the Prophet said to him: 'Allah has
decreed for you that you sit down'. The Jew said: 'I will proceed to this tree and cut it down', and the
Prophet said: 'Allah has decreed for you that you cut it down'. Gabriel, peace be upon him, then came and
said: 'O Muhammad, you have been taught your proof just as Abraham, peace be upon him, was taught it'.
And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots, it
was by Allah's leave, in order that He might confound the evil-livers), i.e. the Jews”.

[59:9]
152
(Those who entered the city and the faith before them…)

[59:9]. Ja‘far ibn Burqan related that Yazid alAsamm said: “The Helpers said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, divide the land into two equal halves between us and
the Emigrants’. He said: ‘No, they will suffice you their livelihood. Instead you will share the fruits of the land
with them while keeping the land itself to yourselves’. They said: ‘We accept’, and so Allah, exalted is He,
revealed (Those who entered the city and the faith before them…)”. (… but prefer (the fugitives) above
themselves though poverty become their lot…)

[59:9]. Sa‘id ibn Ahmad ibn Ja‘far al-Mu’adhdhin informed
us> Abu ‘Ali al-Faqih> Muhammad ibn Mansur ibn Abi al-Jahm al-Sabi‘i> Nasr ibn ‘Ali al-Jahdami> ‘Abd Allah
ibn Dawud> Fudayl ibn Ghazwan> Abu Hazim> Abu Hurayrah who related that the Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, entrusted one of the folk of the Platform (al-Suffah) to a man from the
Helpers. The latter took the former to his family and asked his wife: “Do we have anything [to feed him]?”
She said: “We do not have anything except the children’s food”. He said: “Put them to sleep and then bring
me the food. And when you put the food down, turn the lamp off”. She did as her husband requested. The
Helper offered what he had to his guest. The following morning he took him back to the Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: “Indeed, the
dwellers of the heavens are amazed at what you two have done”. This verse was then revealed (… but
prefer (the fugitives) above themselves though poverty become their lot…). This was narrated by Bukhari>
Musaddid> ‘Abd Allah ibn Dawud, and also by Muslim> Abu Kurayb> Waki‘, and both Ibn Dawud and Waki‘
related it from Fudayl ibn Ghazwan. Abu ‘Abd Allah ibn Ishaq al-Muzakki informed us> Abu’l-Hasan
Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Sulayti> Abu’l-‘Abbas ibn ‘Isa ibn Muhammad al-Marwazi> al-Mustajir ibn alSalt> al-Qasim ibn al-Hakam al-‘Urani> ‘Ubayd Allah ibn al-Walid> Muharib ibn Dithar> ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar
who said: “One of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, was
gifted a sheep’s head. The man said [to himself]: ‘My brother so-and-so is more in need of it than I’, and he
sent it to him. This sheep’s head was sent from one person to another — it was handled by seven
households — until it returned to the first man who was gifted it in the first place. This verse (… but prefer
(the fugitives) above themselves though poverty become their lot…), up to the end, was revealed about
this”.