[60:1]
(O ye who believe! Choose not My enemy and your enemy for allies…)

[60:1]. A group of Qur'anic exegetes
said: “This verse was revealed about Hatib ibn Abi Balta'ah. It happened that Sarah, the client of Abu 'Amr
ibn Sayfi ibn Hashim ibn 'Abd Manaf travelled from Mecca to Medina to see the Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, and found him getting ready to conquer Mecca. He asked her: 'Have you
come as a Muslim?' When she answered in the negative, he asked: 'What has brought you here, then?' She
said: 'You were my family, my clan and my patrons; I am in desperate need and have come so that you give
me and clothe me'. He said: 'What happened to all the youths of Mecca', he asked her this because she was
a singer. She said: 'No one has ever requested anything from me after the Battle of Badr!' The Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, encouraged the Banu 'Abd al-Muttalib and the Banu'l-Muttalib to
be generous to her. They clothed her, gave her money and provided her with a mount. Hatib ibn Abi
Balta'ah then got in touch with her, gave her ten pieces of gold and gave her a letter to hand over to the
people of Mecca. He wrote in this letter: 'From Hatib to the people of Mecca: The Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, is about to attack you, so take precautions'. Sarah left and Gabriel, peace be
upon him, came down and informed the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, of what Hatib had
done. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, sent 'Ali, 'Ammar, al-Zubayr, Talhah, alMiqdad ibn al-Aswad and Abu Marthad - who were all horsemen - saying to them: 'Proceed to the meadow
of Khakh. You will find there a woman on a camel-borne sedan chair. This woman has a letter from Hatib to
the idolaters. Take that letter from her and let her go. But if she refuses to hand over the letter to you,
behead her'. They proceeded to that location and found the woman there. They asked her: 'Where is the
letter?' She swore by Allah that she did not have any letter with her. They searched her belongings but could
not find the letter. They were about to leave when 'Ali said: 'By Allah, he did not tell us a lie, nor do we
disbelieve in what he said to us'. He unsheathed his sword and said: 'Give us the letter or, by Allah, I will
strip you of your clothes and then severe your head'. When she saw the seriousness of the matter, she got
out the letter from her lock, for she had hid it in her hair, and they let her go. They went back to the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. He sent for Hatib and when the latter came, the 
153
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, asked him: 'Do you recognize this letter?' And when
he answered in the affirmative, he asked: 'What drove you to do it?' He said: 'O Messenger of Allah, by
Allah, I have not disbelieved since I became Muslim, nor did I betray you since I took your side, nor did I
love them [the idolaters] since I departed from them. However, there is not a single person among the
Emigrants except that he has someone to defend his closest relatives [in Mecca]. And since I am a stranger
among them, and my family lives amongst them, I feared for them, and so I wanted to have some
assistance from them, even though I knew that Allah will send His harm upon them and that my letter will
be of no avail to them'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, believed and forgave
him. This verse was then revealed (O ye who believe! Choose not My enemy and your enemy for allies…).
'Umar ibn al-Khattab stood up and said: 'O Messenger of Allah, let me strike the neck of this hypocrite!' But
the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: 'O 'Umar, what do you know? It could be
that Allah has looked at the people of Badr and said: 'Do what you please for I have forgiven you' ”. Abu
Bakr Ahmad ibn al-Hasan ibn 'Amr informed us> Muhammad ibn Ya'qub> al-Rabi'> al-Shafi'i> Sufyan ibn
'Uyaynah> 'Amr ibn Dinar> al-Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn 'Ali> 'Ubayd Allah ibn Abi Rafi'> 'Ali who said: “The
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, sent us, al-Zubayr, al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad and me,
saying: 'Proceed to the meadow of Khakh where you will find a woman on a camel-borne sedan chair who
has a letter'. And so we set off riding our horses and proceeded until we found a woman on a camel-borne
sedan chair. We said to her: 'Take the letter out'. She said: 'I do not have any letter!' We said to her: 'You
will either give us the letter or we will strip you naked'. When she heard this, she got the letter from her
braids. We took it to the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. The letter read: 'From
Hatib ibn Abi Balta'ah to some people of the idolaters of Mecca', and informed them about some of what the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, intended to do. The Prophet, Allah bless him and
give him peace, asked Hatib: 'What is this, O Hatib?' Hatib answered: 'Do not be hasty [in judging me], I am
a man who is just annexed to the Quraysh, for I am not a Qurashite. All the Emigrants you have with you
have relatives who will protect their own relatives. I have no relatives in Mecca, and since I lacked relatives I
wanted to get some assistance from them. By Allah, I did not do it because I doubt my religion nor because
I have accepted disbelief after choosing Islam'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
said: 'He has said the truth!' But 'Umar exclaimed: 'Let me strike the neck of this hypocrite!' The Prophet,
Allah bless him and give him peace, said: 'He has taken part in the Battle of Badr; and you do not know,
perhaps Allah has looked at those who took part in the Battle of Badr and said: 'Do as you please for I have
forgiven you'. Then this verse was revealed (O ye who believe! Choose not My enemy and your enemy for
allies…)”. This was narrated by Bukhari from al-Humaydi and by Muslim from Abu Bakr ibn Shaybah and
another group, all of whom related it from Sufyan.

[60:6-8]
(Verily ye have in them a goodly pattern for everyone who looketh to Allah and the Last Day…)

[60:6-8].
Allah, exalted is He, says to the believers: “You have in Abraham as well as in the prophets and friends of
Allah good role models, regarding their declaration of enmity towards their relatives who were idolaters,
which should be emulated”. So when this verse was revealed, the believers declared their relatives who
were idolaters to be their enemies. They showed this enmity to them and absolved themselves of all the
things that they did or believed in. Allah, exalted is He, knew that this was hard on the believers and so He
revealed (It may be that Allah will ordain love between you and those of them with whom ye are at enmity)

[60:7]. And He did just that when many of them embraced Islam, thus becoming brothers and friends.
Consequently, they mingled with and married from among each other. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless
him and give him peace, married Umm Habibah, the daughter of Abu Sufyan ibn Harb. As a result, Abu
Sufyan mellowed a little. When he heard of the news of his daughter's marriage, he said while he was still
an idolater: “He is an outstanding person, no harm shall come to him”. Abu Salih Mansur ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab
al-Bazzaz informed us> Abu 'Amr Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Hiri> Abu Ya'la> Ibrahim ibn al-Hajjaj> 'Abd
Allah ibn al-Mubarak> Mus'ab ibn Thabit> 'Ami ibn 'Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr> his father who said: “Qutaylah
bint 'Abd al-'Uzza went to visit her daughter Asma' bint Abi Bakr and took with her gifts: desert lizards,
clarified butter and dry cheese. However, Asma' refused to let her in her house and rejected her gifts.
'A'ishah went on behalf of Asma' to ask the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, about this. Allah,
exalted is He, revealed (Allah forbiddeth you not those who warred not against you on account of religion)

[60:8]. Asma' then let her mother into her house and accepted her gifts”. This was narrated by al-Hakim
Abu 'Abd Allah in his Sahih> Abu'l-'Abbas al-Sayyari> 'Abd Allah al-Ghazal> Ibn Shaqiq> Ibn al-Mubarak. 
154

[60:10]
(O ye who believe! When believing women come unto you as fugitives, examine them. Allah is Best Aware of
their faith…)

[60:10]. Ibn ‘Abbas said: “On the year of Hudaybiyyah, the idolaters of Mecca signed a peace
treaty with the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace. This treaty stipulated that whoever
of the people of Mecca runs away to him from them should be returned to them, and whoever of his
Companions runs away to the people of Mecca will not be returned. They wrote the treaty and sealed it. Just
after signing the treaty, Subay‘ah bint al-Harith al-Aslamiyyah went to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give
him peace, while he was still at al-Hudaybiyyah. Her husband, who was an unbeliever came and said: ‘O
Muhammad, return my wife to me, for you had agreed to return to us whoever runs away to you. The ink of
the treaty has not dried yet’. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed this verse”. Al-Hasan ibn Muhammad alFarisi informed us> Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn al-Fadl> Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Hafiz>
Muhammad ibn Yahya> Hasan ibn al-Rabi‘ ibn al-Khashshab> Ibn Idris> Muhammad ibn Ishaq> al-Zuhri
who said: “I entered in on ‘Urwah ibn al-Zubayr while he was writing a letter to Ibn Hunaydah, the aid of alWalid ibn ‘Abd al-Malik, in reply to his question about the words of Allah, exalted is He, (O ye who believe!
When believing women come unto you as fugitives, examine them). He wrote to him: ‘The Messenger of
Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, signed a peace treaty with the Quraysh on the day of alHudaybiyyah. The treaty stipulated that he should return to them whoever goes to him without the
permission of his custodian. When women emigrated [from Mecca to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give
him peace,] Allah, exalted is He, refused to turn them back to the idolaters after it has been ascertained that
they had migrated for Islam. This examination consisted of giving back their dowers to the idolaters if they
are kept back [with the Muslims], provided that the idolaters give back the dowers of the wives of Muslims
who stayed back in Mecca’. He said: ‘That is the judgement of Allah with which He judges between them.
The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, therefore, kept back women and sent back to
the Quraysh the men who had run away from them’ ”.

[60:13]
(O ye who believe! Be not friendly with a folk with whom Allah is wroth…)

[60:13]. This verse was revealed
about some poor Muslims who used to inform the Jews of the news of Muslims and keep in touch with them.
They got in exchange some of their fruits. And so Allah, glorified and exalted is He, warned them against
this.