[7:31]
(O Children of Adam! Look to your adornment at every place of worship…)

[7:31]. Sa‘id ibn Muhammad al-
‘Adl informed us> Abu ‘Amr ibn Hamdan> al-Hasan ibn Sufyan> al-Hasan ibn Hammad al-Warraq> Abu
Yahya al-Himmani> Nasr ibn al-Hasan al-Haddad> ‘Ikrimah> Ibn ‘Abbas who said: “Some of the Bedouins
used to circumambulate the Sacred House completely naked to the extent that their women
circumambulated the House completely naked except for straps — like the straps placed on the faces of
donkeys to protect them from flies — placed around their lower parts, reciting: ‘Today some or all of it will
show/And whatever appears of it, I do not make it lawful’. Allah, exalted is He, therefore, revealed to His
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace: (O Children of Adam! Look to your adornment at every place
of worship…) and so, they were commanded to wear clothes”. ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Ahmad al-‘Attar informed
us> Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Hafiz> Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub al-Ma‘qili> Ibrahim ibn Marzuq> Abu
Dawud al-Tayalisi> Shu‘bah> Salamah ibn Kuhayl> Muslim al-Batin> Sa‘id ibn Jubayr> Ibn ‘Abbas who said:
“In the pre-Islamic period, women used to go round the Sacred House completely naked, except for a rag
around their private parts, reciting: Today some or all of it will show And whatever appears of it, I do not
make it lawful. And so this verse (Look to your adornment at every place of worship…) was revealed; as was
revealed (Say: Who hath forbidden the adornment of Allah which He hath brought forth for His bondmen…)

[7:32-33]”. Narrated by Muslim from Bundar from Ghundar from Shu‘bah. Al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Farisi
informed us> Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn Hamdun> Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Hafiz> Muhammad ibn
Yahya> Isma‘il ibn Uways> his brother> Sulayman ibn Bilal> Muhammad ibn Abi ‘Atiq> Ibn Shihab> Abu
Salamah ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman who said: “It was the norm according to the religion which they followed that, 
80
when they went to pilgrimage and returned from Mina, none of them was allowed to go round the House
with the clothes which they wore. And so, whoever wanted to go round the House had to undress and put
his clothes aside until after circumambulation. This act was supposed to display more piety from the person
who did it. Allah, exalted is He, then revealed about them (O Children of Adam! Look to your adornment at
every place of worship…) up to His words (for people who have knowledge)

[7:32]. This was revealed about
those who go round the Sacred House naked”. Said al-Kalbi: “During the days of pilgrimage, people of the
pre-Islamic period ate very little and refrained from fats as a sign of their glorification of pilgrimage. The
Muslims said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, we have a better right to do that’, and as a result, Allah, exalted is He,
revealed (and eat) meat and fats (and drink)”.

[7:175]
(Recite unto them the tale of him to whom We gave Our revelations, but he sloughed them off…)

[7:175].
Ibn Mas'ud said: “This verse was revealed about Bal'am ibn Abrah, one of the Children of Israel”, while Ibn
'Abbas and other commentators of the Qur'an said this relates to Bal'am ibn Ba'ura. Said al-Walibi: “He was
a man from the city of al-Jabbarin and his name was Bal'am. This man knew Allah's greatest name. When
Moses, peace be upon him, went to this city, his cousins and people went to see Bal'am and said to him:
'Moses is a tough man and he has a huge army. He will definitely destroy us if he ever conquers us. Pray to
Allah that he drives Moses and those with him away from us'. The man said: 'I will lose both this world and
the next if I were to pray to Allah to drive away Moses and those with him'. But they kept insisting until he
prayed against Moses and those with him. As a result, [Allah] stripped him of what he had. Hence Allah's
saying (but he sloughed them off…)”. Said 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr ibn al-'As and Zayd ibn Aslam: “This verse
was revealed about Umayyah ibn Abi al-Salt al-Thaqafi who had studied the Scriptures and knew that Allah
was about to send a messenger at around that time, hoping to be himself that messenger. When Allah,
exalted is He, sent Muhammad, Allah bless him and give him peace, he envied him resentfully and
disbelieved in him”. Ibn 'Abbas said, according to the report of 'Ikrimah: “This verse is about a man who was
given three prayers which were answered. This man had a wife called al-Basus who loved him, and from her
he had children. One day she said to him: 'Let one of those answered prayers of yours be for me'. He said:
'One is for you, what do you wish for?' She said: 'Ask Allah to make me the most beautiful woman among
the Children of Israel'. [He did and] when she knew that there was no one like her, she shunned him and
wanted something else. The man prayed to Allah to make her a barking dog. And so, two prayers were
wasted. Then, her children came to him and said: 'We cannot stand this, our mother has become a barking
dog and people are insulting us because of her. Pray that Allah restores her to her initial state'. The man
prayed and she became as she was before. But all three answered prayers were now wasted. This is alBasus whose ill-omen became a proverb. People say: He/she is more ill-omened than al-Basus”.

[7:187]
(They ask thee of the (destined) Hour, when will it come to port…)

[7:187]. Said ibn 'Abbas: “Jabal ibn
Qushayr and Shamwal ibn Zayd, who belonged to the Jews, said: 'O Muhammad, tell us when the last Hour
will be, if you are really a prophet, for we know when it is going to be?' And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed
this verse”. Qatadah said: “The Quraysh said to Muhammad: 'There are between us ties of kinship, so tell us
the timing of the last Hour?' And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse (They ask thee of the (destined)
Hour)”. Abu Sa'id ibn Abu Bakr al-Warraq informed us> Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Hamdan> Abu Ya'la>
'Uqbah ibn Mukram> Yunus> 'Abd al-Ghaffar ibn al-Qasim> Aban ibn Laqit> Qarzah ibn Hassan who said: “I
heard Abu Musa on a Friday on the pulpit of the main mosque of Basrah say: 'The Messenger of Allah, Allah
bless him and give him peace, was asked about the timing of the last Hour while I was present, and so he
said: 'None know its timing except Allah. He alone will manifest it at its proper time. However, I will inform
you about its signs and what will happen ahead of it. There will be a lot of trials and harj ahead of the last
Hour'. They asked: 'What does harj mean, O Messenger of Allah?' He said: 'This is an Abyssinian word which
means killing, dryness of people's hearts and that one is cast among strangers, such that people hardly
know each other, those who have good minds will disappear and only a group of weak people will remain
who would neither know good nor forbid evil” '.

[7:188]
81
(Say: For myself I have no power to benefit, nor power to hurt…)

[7:188]. Said al-Kalbi: “The people of
Mecca said: ‘O Muhammad, does not your Lord inform you about lower prices before they go up, and thus
you buy and make profit? And does He not inform you about the land which is about to suffer drought and,
thus, you travel to a land which is more fertile?’ And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed this verse”.

[7:189-191]
(He it is Who did create you from a single soul…)

[7:189] up to (… but are themselves created)

[7:191].
Said Mujahid: “Initially, all the children of Adam and Eve died in their infancy. And so, Satan whispered to
them: 'If a boy is born to you, call him 'Abd al-Harith [the slave of al-Harith]'. The name of Satan was, prior
to that, al-Harith. Adam and Eve did as he asked them to do, hence the words of Allah, exalted is He: (But
when He gave unto them aright, they ascribed to Him partners in respect of that which He had given
them…)”.

[7:204]
(And when the Qur’an is recited, give ear to it and pay heed…)

[7:204]. Abu Mansur al-Mansuri informed
us> ‘Ali ibn ‘Umar al-Hafiz> ‘Abd Allah ibn Sulayman al-Ash‘ath> al-‘Abbas ibn al-Walid ibn Mizyad> his
father> al-Awza‘i> ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Amir> Zayd ibn Aslam> his father> Abu Hurayrah who said regarding this
verse (And when the Qur’an is recited…): “This was revealed about raising voices while in prayer behind the
Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace”. Said Qatadah: “When the prayer was first
obligated, people used to speak during their prayers. A man would come and shout to his friend: ‘How many
units of prayers have you performed?’ and his friend would respond: ‘such-and-such’ [while he is still in his
prayer]. And so this verse was revealed”. Al-Zuhri said: “This was revealed about a youth from among the
Helpers. Whenever the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, recited something from the Qur’an, this
youth joined him in the recitation”. Ibn ‘Abbas said: “Once, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give
him peace, read aloud during a prescribed prayer and his Companions read behind him with raised voices
which made him stumble in his reading, and so this verse was revealed”. Sa‘id ibn Jubayr, Mujahid, ‘Ata’,
‘Amr ibn Dinar and other commentators of the Qur’an are of the opinion that this verse was revealed about
listening to the prayer leader upon giving the sermon of the Friday prayer.