[66:5]. And when
the verse (Verily We created man from a product of wet earth)

[66:1]
(O Prophet! Why bannest thou that which Allah hath made lawful for thee…)

[66:1]. Muhammad ibn Mansur
al-Tusi informed us> 'Ali ibn 'Umar ibn Mahdi> al-Husayn ibn Isma'il al-Mahamili> 'Abd Allah ibn Shabib>
Ishaq ibn Muhammad> 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar> Abu'l-Nadr, the client of 'Umar ibn 'Abd Allah> 'Ali ibn 'Abbas>
Ibn 'Abbas> 'Umar who said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, entered the
house of Hafsah along with the mother of his son, Mariyah. When Hafsah found him with her [in an intimate
moment], she said: 'Why did you bring her in my house? You did this to me, to the exception of all your
wives, only because I am too insignificant to you'. He said to her: 'Do not mention this to 'A'ishah; she is
forbidden for me [i.e. Mariyah] if I ever touch her'. Hafsah said: 'How could she be forbidden for you when
she is your slave girl?' He swore to her that he will not touch her and then said: 'Do not mention this
incident to anyone'. But she went ahead and informed 'A'ishah. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him
peace, decided not to go to his wives for a month. He stayed away from them twenty nine days when Allah,
glorious and exalted is He, revealed (O Prophet! Why bannest thou that which Allah hath made lawful for
thee, seeking to please thy wives?)”. Abu Ibrahim Isma'il ibn Ibrahim al-Wa'iz informed us> Bishr ibn Ahmad
ibn Bishr> Ja'far ibn al-Hasan al-Firyabi> Minjab ibn al-Harith> 'Ali ibn Mushir> Hisham ibn 'Urwah> his
father> 'A'ishah who said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, used to like sweet
and honey. It was also his habit to go to his wives after finishing the 'Asr prayer. In one occasion he went to
Hafsah bint 'Umar and stayed with her more than he usually did. When I found out about this, I enquired
about the reason and I was told that a woman from her clan gifted her with a pot of honey which she
offered to the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace. I said to myself: by Allah I will spoil it for him. I
said to Sawdah bint Zam'ah: 'When he comes to your apartment and draws closer to you, say: O Messenger
of Allah, did you eat Maghafir?' When he says: 'Hafsah fed me some honey', say: 'The bees which produced
it must have eaten the 'Urfut'. I will say the same thing, and you, Safiyyah, should say the same'. Sawdah
said: 'By Allah, the moment he stood at the door I was about to begin what she commanded me to do'. 
159
When he drew closer to her she said: 'O Messenger of Allah, did you eat Maghafir?' 'No!' he replied. She
said: 'Then, what is this smell on you?' He said: 'Hafsah fed me some honey!' she said: “The bees which
produced it must have eaten the 'Urfut'. When he came to me, I said the same thing. And when he went to
Safiyyah she also repeated the same thing. When it was Hafsah's turn and the Prophet went to her, she said
to him: 'O Messenger of Allah, shall I feed you some of that honey?' He said: 'I do not feel like it!' Sawdah
said: 'Glory be to Allah, we have deprived him [of honey]'. But I said to her: 'Be quiet!' ” This was narrated
by Bukhari from Farwah ibn Abi al-Maghra', and also by Muslim from Suwayd ibn Sa'id ; and both Farwah
and Suwayd related it from 'Ali ibn Mushir. Abu 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi Hamid informed us> Zahir ibn
Ahmad> al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Mus'ab> Yahya ibn Hakim> Abu Dawud> 'Amir al-Khazzaz> Ibn Abi
Mulaykah who related that Sawdah bint Zam'ah had relatives from her mother's side in the Yemen who used
to gift her honey. Among all the wives of the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, Hafsah and
'A'ishah were very close to each other. One of them said to the other: “Do you not see this? He goes to her
when it is not her turn just to have some of that honey. So when he comes to you hold your nose, and when
he asks you about the reason, say: I smell something in you that I do not know what it is. When he comes
to me, I shall say the same thing”. When the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, went to her she
held her nose. He asked her: “What's wrong?” She said: “I smell something in you and I think it is the smell
of Maghafir”. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, used to put on him good perfume
whenever he found it. When he went to his other wife and she said the same thing. He said: “So-and-so said
the same thing to me; this must be something that I ate at the house of Sawdah, and, by Allah, I will never
eat it again!” Ibn Abi Mulaykah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: “The verse (O Prophet! Why bannest thou that
which Allah hath made lawful for thee, seeking to please thy wives?) was revealed about this [the incident
reported above]”.

[66:4]
(If ye twain turn unto Allah repentant, (ye have cause to do so) for your hearts desired (the ban)…)

[66:4].
Abu Mansur al-Mansuri informed us> Abu’l-Hasan al-Daraqutni> al-Husayn ibn Isma‘il> ‘Abd Allah ibn
Shabib> Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz> his father> al-Zuhri> ‘Ubayd Allah ibn ‘Abd Allah> Ibn
‘Abbas who said: “Hafsah found the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, with Umm
Ibrahim when it was ‘A’ishah’s turn. She said to him: ‘I will definitely inform her!’ The Messenger of Allah,
Allah bless him and give him peace, said: ‘She is forbidden for me if I touch her again’. Hafsah went ahead
and informed ‘A’ishah. Allah informed His Messenger of this and he let Hafsah know some of the things she
said. She asked him: ‘Who informed you of this?’ He said: ‘(The Knower, the Aware hath told me)

[66:3]’.
The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, stayed away from his wives for a month and
then Allah, glorious and exalted is He, revealed: (If ye twain turn unto Allah repentant, (ye have cause to do
so) for your hearts desired (the ban)…)”.