[71:26]. Then,
the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: 'Today, you are dependent, you are today
dependent; none of them shall be returned except in exchange for a ransom or he will be beheaded'. Allah,
glorious and majestic is He, then revealed (It is not for any prophet to have captives until he hath made
slaughter in the land) up to his words (Now enjoy what ye have won, as lawful and good) up to the end of 
85
the next three verses”. 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Hamdan al-'Adl informed us> Ahmad ibn Ja'far ibn Malik> 'Abd
Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal> Ahmad ibn Hanbal> Abu Nuh Qurrad> 'Ikrimah ibn 'Ammar> Simak al-Hanafi
Abu Zumayl> Ibn 'Abbas> 'Umar ibn al-Khattab who said: “When the army of the believers met the army of
the unbelievers at Badr and the idolaters were defeated (seventy men of them were killed and another
seventy captured), the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, consulted Abu Bakr, 'Umar
and 'Ali about what to do with the prisoners. Abu Bakr said: 'O Prophet of Allah, these are our brothers,
cousins and sons of our clan and my opinion is that you accept a ransom from them, so that what we take
from them will be an added strength for us against the unbelievers. And haply Allah will guide them to Islam
and be a support to us'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, then asked: 'What do
you think, O son of al-Khattab?' He said: 'By Allah, I do not agree with Abu Bakr. My opinion is that you give
me so-and-so (a relative of 'Umar) so that I behead him, and give 'Aqil to 'Ali so that he behead him and soand-so (al-'Abbas ) to Hamzah so that he beheads him. In this way, Allah, glorious and majestic is He, will
know that there is no complaisance in our hearts toward the idolaters. These are their notables, leaders and
chiefs'. The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, liked what Abu Bakr said and disliked
what I said. And so, he accepted a ransom from them. The following day, 'Umar said: I went to see the
Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, and found him sitting with Abu Bakr. They were both crying. I
said: 'O Messenger of Allah, what is it that makes you and your companion weep? If I can cry, I will cry with
you, if not I will feign crying'. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, said: “I am crying because
of the suggestion of ransoming the prisoners which your fellow believers advised me to do. Your
chastisement was closer to you than this tree (and he pointed to a near by tree). Allah, exalted is He, had
revealed (It is not for any prophet to have captives until he hath made slaughter in the land) up to His
words (… an awful doom had come upon you on account of what ye took) of ransom. This was narrated by
Muslim in his Sahih from Hannad ibn al-Sariyy from Ibn al-Mubarak from 'Ikrimah ibn 'Ammar.