[80:1-2]
(He frowned and turned away. Because the blind man came unto him)

[80:1-2]. This refers to Ibn Umm
Maktum. The latter went to see the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace, while the latter was
meeting 'Utbah ibn Rabi'ah, Abu Jahl ibn Hisham, 'Abbas ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib, and Ubayy and Umayyah the
sons of Khalaf. He was calling them to Allah, hoping that they might embrace Islam. Ibn Umm Maktum
stood up and said: “O Messenger of Allah, teach me of that which Allah has taught you”. He kept on
requesting him and repeating his request, not knowing that he was busy and dealing with someone else.
Signs of annoyance appeared on the face of the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, 
162
because of being repeatedly interrupted. He said in himself: “These chiefs will say: his followers consist of
only the blind, lowly people and slaves!” The Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace,
frowned and turned away from him, and faced toward the people he was addressing. Allah, exalted is He,
then revealed these verses. After this, the Messenger of Allah, Allah bless him and give him peace, used to
honour him, and would say, whenever he saw him: “Welcome to the one about whom my Lord has rebuked
me!” Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman al-Musahifi informed us> Abu 'Amr Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Hamdan> Abu Ya'la> Sa'id ibn Yahya ibn Sa'id> his father> Hisham ibn 'Urwah> 'A'ishah who said: “(He
frowned and turned away) was revealed about Ibn Umm Maktum, the blind. The latter went to the Prophet,
Allah bless him and give him peace, and kept saying: 'O Messenger of Allah, guide me', while there were
with the Messenger of Allah the leaders of the idolaters. The Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace,
kept avoiding him and turning to the others. It is about this that (He frowned and turned away) was
revealed”. This was revealed by al-Hakim in his Sahih from 'Ali ibn 'Isa al-Hiri> al-'Utabi> Sa'd ibn Yahya.

[80:37]
(Every man that day will have concern enough to make him heedless (of others))

[80:37]. Abu Sa‘id ibn Abi
‘Amr informed us> al-Hasan ibn Ahmad al-Shaybani> ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Muslim> Abu Ja‘far
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Sinan> Ibrahim ibn Harasah> ‘A’idh ibn Shurayh al-Kindi> Anas ibn Malik who
reported that ‘A’ishah asked the Prophet, Allah bless him and give him peace: “Will we be mustered naked?”
He said: “Yes!” She said: “Shame!” And so Allah, exalted is He, revealed (Every man that day will have
concern enough to make him heedless (of others)).